Chapter 10- Formatting—and why
it’s done on the right


Let’s quickly review: you know that PowerShell cmdlets produce objects, and that
those objects often contain more properties than PowerShell shows by default. You
know how to use Gm to get a list of all of an object’s properties, and you know how to
use Select-Object to specify the properties you want to see. Up to this point in the
book, you’ve relied on PowerShell’s default configuration and rules to determine
how the final output will appear on the screen (or in a file, or in hardcopy form).
In this chapter, you’ll learn to override those defaults and create your own formatting for your commands’ output.

10.1 Formatting: making what you see prettier
We don’t want to give you the impression that PowerShell is a full-fledged
management-reporting tool, because it isn’t. But PowerShell has good capabilities
for collecting information about computers, and, with the right output, you can
certainly produce reports using that information. The trick is getting the right output, and that’s what formatting is all about.

On the surface, PowerShell’s formatting system can seem easy to use—and for
the most part that’s true. But the formatting system also contains some of the trickiest “gotchas” in the entire shell, so we want to make sure you understand how it
works and why it does what it does. We’re not just going to show you a few new commands here; rather, we’ll explain how the entire system works, how you can interact
with it, and what limitations you might run into.

10.2 About the default formatting
Run our old friend Get-Process again, and pay special attention to the column headers. Notice that they don’t exactly match the property names. Instead, they each have
a specific width, alignment, and so forth. All that configuration stuff has to come from
someplace, right? You’ll find it in one of the .format.ps1xml files that install with PowerShell. Specifically, formatting directions for process objects are in DotNetTypes.format.ps1xml.

TRY IT NOW You’ll definitely want to have PowerShell open so that you can
follow along with what we’re about to show you. This will help you understand
what the formatting system is up to under the hood.

We’ll begin by changing to the PowerShell installation folder and opening DotNetTypes.format.ps1xml. Be careful not to save any changes to this file. It’s digitally
signed, and any changes that you save—even a single carriage return or space added
to the file—will break the signature and prevent PowerShell from using the file.
PS C:\>cd $pshome
PS C:\>notepad dotnettypes.format.ps1xml

Next, find out the exact type of object returned by Get-Process:
PS C:\>get-process | gm
Now follow these steps:
1 Copy and paste the complete type name, System.Diagnostics.Process, to the
clipboard. To do so, use your cursor to highlight the type name, and press
Return to copy it to the clipboard.
2 Switch over to Notepad and press Ctrl-F to open the Find window.
3 In the Find window, paste in the type name you copied to the clipboard. Click
Find Next.
4 The first thing you find will probably be a ProcessModule object, not a Process
object, so click Find Next again and again until you locate System.Diagnostics
.Process in the file. Figure 10.1 shows what you should have found.

Figure 10.1 Locating the process
view in Windows Notepad

What you’re now looking at in Notepad is the set of directions that govern how a
process is displayed by default. Scroll down a bit, and you’ll see the definition for a
table view, which you should expect because you already know that processes display in
a multicolumn table. You’ll see the familiar column names, and if you scroll down a
bit more you’ll see where the file specifies which property will display in each column.
You’ll see definitions for column widths and alignments too. When you’re done
browsing, close Notepad, being careful not to save any changes that you may have
accidentally made to the file, and go back to PowerShell.
When you run Get-Process, here’s what happens in the shell:
1 The cmdlet places objects of the type System.Diagnostics.Process into the
pipeline.
2 At the end of the pipeline is an invisible cmdlet called Out-Default. It’s always
there, and its job is to pick up whatever objects are in the pipeline after all of
your commands have run.
3 Out-Default passes the objects to Out-Host, because the PowerShell console is
designed to use the screen (called the host) as its default form of output. In theory, someone could write a shell that uses files or printers as the default output
instead, but nobody has that we know of.
4 Most of the Out- cmdlets are incapable of working with normal objects. Instead,
they’re designed to work with special formatting instructions. So when
Out-Host sees that it has been handed normal objects, it passes them to the formatting system.
5 The formatting system looks at the type of the object and follows an internal set
of formatting rules (we’ll cover those in a moment). It uses those rules to produce formatting instructions, which are passed back to Out-Host.
6 Once Out-Host sees that it has formatting instructions, it follows those instructions to construct the onscreen display.

All of this happens whenever you manually specify an Out- cmdlet, too. For example,
run Get-Process | Out-File procs.txt, and Out-File will see that you’ve sent it
some normal objects. It will pass those to the formatting system, which creates formatting instructions and passes them back to Out-File. Out-File then constructs the text
file based on those instructions. So the formatting system becomes involved any time
objects need to be converted into human-readable textual output.
  What rules does the formatting system follow in step 5, above? For the first formatting rule, the system looks to see if the type of object it’s dealing with has a predefined
view. That’s what you saw in DotNetTypes.format.ps1xml: a predefined view for a
Process object. There are a few other .format.ps1xml files installed with PowerShell,
and they’re all loaded by default when the shell starts. You can create your own predefined views as well, although doing so is beyond the scope of this book.
  The formatting system looks for predefined views that specifically target the object
type it’s dealing with—meaning that in this case it’s looking for the view that handles
System.Diagnostics.Process objects.
What if there is no predefined view? For example, try running this:
Get-WmiObject Win32_OperatingSystem | Gm

Grab that object’s type name (or at least the “Win32_OperatingSystem” part), and try
to find it in one of the .format.ps1xml files. We’ll save you some time by telling you
that you won’t find it.
 This is where the formatting system takes its next step, or what we call the second
formatting rule: it looks to see if anyone has declared a default display property
set for that type of object. You’ll find those in a different configuration file,
Types.ps1xml. Go ahead and open it in Notepad now (again, be careful not to save
any changes to this file) and use the Find function to locate Win32_OperatingSystem.
Once you do, scroll down a bit and you’ll see DefaultDisplayPropertySet. It’s shown
in figure 10.2. Make a note of the six properties listed there.
 Now, go back to PowerShell and run this:
Get-WmiObject Win32_OperatingSystem
Do the results look familiar? They should: the properties you see are there solely
because they’re listed as defaults in Types.ps1xml. If the formatting system finds a
default display property set, it will use that set of properties for its next decision.
If it doesn’t find one, the next decision will consider all of the object’s properties.

 That next decision—the third formatting rule—is about what kind of output to
create. If the formatting system will display four or fewer properties, it will use a table.
If there are five or more properties, it will use a list. That’s why the Win32
_OperatingSystem object wasn’t displayed as a table: there were six properties, triggering a list. The theory is that more than four properties might not fit well into an ad
hoc table without truncating information.
 Now you know how the default formatting works. You also know that most Outcmdlets will automatically trigger the formatting system, so that they can get the formatting instructions they need. Next let’s look at how we can control that formatting
system ourselves, and override the defaults. 

Figure 10.2 Locating a
DefaultDisplayPropertySet
in Notepad

10.3 Formatting tables
There are four formatting cmdlets in PowerShell, and we’ll work with the three that
provide the most day-to-day formatting capability (the fourth is briefly discussed in an
“Above and beyond” section near the end of this chapter). First up is Format-Table,
which has an alias, Ft.
 If you read the help file for Format-Table, you’ll notice that it has a number of
parameters. These are some of the most useful ones, along with examples of how to
use them:
 -autoSize—Normally PowerShell tries to make a table fill the width of your
window (the exception is when a predefined view, like the one for processes,
defines column widths). That means a table with relatively few columns will
have a lot of space in between those columns, which isn’t always attractive. By
adding the -autosize parameter, you force the shell to try to size each column
to hold its contents, and no more. This makes the table a bit “tighter” in appearance, and it will take a bit of extra time for the shell to start producing output.
That’s because it has to examine every object that will be formatted to find the
longest values for each column. Try the following example both with and without the -autosize parameter.
Get-WmiObject Win32_BIOS | Format-Table -autoSize
 -property—This parameter accepts a comma-separated list of properties that
should be included in the table. These properties aren’t case-sensitive, but the
shell will use whatever you type as the column headers, so you can get nicerlooking output by properly casing the property names (“CPU” instead of “cpu,”
for example). This parameter accepts wildcards, meaning you can specify * to
include all properties in the table, or something like c* to include all properties
starting with c. Notice that the shell will still only display the properties it can fit
in the table, so not every property you specify may display. This parameter is positional, so you don’t have to type the parameter name, provided the property list
is in the first position. Try these examples (the last one is shown in figure 10.3):
Get-Process | Format-Table -property *
Get-Process | Format-Table -property ID,Name,Responding -autoSize
Get-Process | Format-Table * -autoSize
 -groupBy—This parameter generates a new set of column headers each time
the specified property value changes. This only works well when you have first
sorted the objects on that same property. An example is the best way to see how
this works:
Get-Service | Sort-Object Status | Format-Table -groupBy Status
 -wrap—If the shell has to truncate information in a column, it will end that column with ellipses (...) to visually indicate that information was suppressed.
This parameter enables the shell to wrap information, which will make the table
longer, but will preserve all of the information you wanted to display. Here’s an
example:
Get-Service | Format-Table Name,Status,DisplayName -autoSize -wrap

TRY IT NOW You should run through all of these examples in the shell, and
feel free to mix and match these techniques. Experiment a bit to see what
works, and what sort of output you can create.

10.4 Formatting lists
Sometimes you need to display more information than will fit horizontally in a table,
which can make a list useful. Format-List is the cmdlet you’ll turn to, or you can use
its alias, Fl.
 This cmdlet supports some of the same parameters as Format-Table, including
-property. In fact, Fl is another way of displaying the properties of an object. Unlike
Gm, Fl will also display the values for those properties, so that you can see what kind of
information each property contains:
Get-Service | Fl *
Figure 10.4 shows an example of the output. We often use Fl as an alternative way of
discovering the properties of an object.
TRY IT NOW Read the help for Format-List and try experimenting with its
different parameters.

10.5 Formatting wide
The last cmdlet, Format-Wide (or its alias, Fw), displays a wide list. It’s able to display
only the values of a single property, so its -property parameter accepts only one property name, not a list, and it can’t accept wildcards.
 By default, Format-Wide will look for an object’s Name property, because Name is a
commonly used property and usually contains useful information. The display will
generally default to two columns, but a -columns parameter can be used to specify
more columns:
Get-Process | Format-Wide name -col 4
Figure 10.5 shows an example of what you should see.
TRY IT NOW Read the help for Format-Wide, and try experimenting with its
different parameters.


10.6 Custom columns and list entries
Flip back to the previous chapter, and review section 9.5, “When things don’t line up:
custom properties.” In that section, we showed you how to use a hash table construct
to add custom properties to an object. Both Format-Table and Format-List can use
those same constructs to create custom table columns or custom list entries.
 You might do this to provide a column header that’s different from the property
name being displayed:
Get-Service |
Format-Table @{n='ServiceName';e={$_.Name}},Status,DisplayName
Or, you might put a more complex mathematical expression in place:
Get-Process |
Format-Table Name,
@{n='VM(MB)';e={$_.VM / 1MB -as [int]}} -autosize
Figure 10.6 shows the output of the preceding command. We admit, we’re cheating
there a little bit by throwing in a bunch of stuff that we haven’t talked about yet.
 We might as well talk about it now:
 Obviously, we’re starting with Get-Process, a cmdlet you’re more than familiar
with by now. If you run Get-Process | Fl *, you’ll see that the VM property is
in bytes, although that’s not how the default table view displays it.
 We’re telling Format-Table to start with the process’s Name property

Figure 10.6 Creating a custom, calculated table column

 Next, we’re creating a custom column that will be labeled VM(MB). The value, or
expression, for that column takes the object’s normal VM property and divides it
by 1MB. The slash is PowerShell’s division operator, and PowerShell recognizes
the shortcuts KB, MB, GB, TB, and PB as denoting kilobyte, megabyte, gigabyte,
terabyte, and petabyte respectively.
 The result of that division operation will have a decimal component that we
don’t want to see. The -as operator enables us to change the data type of that
result from a floating-point value to, in this case, an integer value (specified by
[int]). The shell will round up or down, as appropriate, when making that
conversion. The result is a whole number with no fractional component.
Figure 10.6 Creating a custom, calculated table column
Above and beyond
We’d like you to try repeating this example:
Get-Process |
Format-Table Name,
@{n='VM(MB)';e={$_.VM / 1MB -as [int]}} -autosize
But this time don’t type it all on one line. Type it exactly as it’s shown here in the
book, on three lines total. You’ll notice after typing the first line, which ends with a
pipe character, that PowerShell changes its prompt. That’s because you ended the
shell in a pipe, and the shell knows that there are more commands coming. It will
enter this same “waiting for you to finish” mode if you hit Return without properly closing all curly braces, quotation marks, and parentheses. (continued)
If you didn’t mean to enter that extended-typing mode, hit Ctrl-C to abort, and start
over. In this case, you could type the second line of text and hit Return, and then type
the third line and hit Return. In this mode, you’ll have to hit Return one last time, on
a blank line, to tell the shell you’re done. When you do so, it will execute the command as if it had been typed on a single, continuous line.

We wanted to show you this little division-and-changing trick because it can be useful
in creating nicer-looking output. We won’t spend much more time in this book on
these operations (although we will tell you that * is used for multiplication, and as you
might expect + and - are for addition and subtraction).
 Unlike Select-Object, whose hash tables can only accept a Name and Expression
key (although it’ll also accept N, L, and Label for Name, and will accept E for Expression), the Format- commands can handle additional keys that are intended to control the visual display. These additional keys are most useful with Format-Table:
 FormatString specifies a formatting code, causing the data to be displayed
according to the specified format. This is mainly useful with numeric and date
data. Go to MSDN’s “Formatting Types” page (http://msdn.microsoft.com/
en-us/library/26etazsy.aspx) to review the available codes for standard numeric
and date formatting, and for custom numeric and date formatting.
 Width specifies the desired column width.
 Alignment specifies the desired column alignment, either Left or Right.
Using those additional keys makes it a bit easier to achieve the previous example’s
results, and even to improve upon them:
Get-Process |
Format-Table Name,
@{n='VM(MB)';e={$_.VM};formatstring='F2';align='right'} -autosize
Now we don’t have to do the division, because PowerShell will format the number as a
fixed-point value having two decimal places, and it will right-align the result.
10.7 Going out: to a file, a printer, or the host
Once something is formatted, you have to decide where it will go.
 If a command line ends in a Format- cmdlet, the formatting instructions created
by the Format- cmdlet will go to Out-Default, which forwards them to Out-Host,
which displays them on the screen:
Get-Service | Format-Wide
You could also manually pipe the formatting instructions to Out-Host, which would
accomplish exactly the same thing:
Get-Service | Format-Wide | Out-Host

Alternatively, you can pipe formatting instructions to either Out-File or Out-Printer
to direct formatted output to a file or to hardcopy. As you’ll read later, in “Common
points of confusion,” only one of those three Out- cmdlets should ever follow a
Format- cmdlet on the command line.
 Keep in mind that both Out-Printer and Out-File default to a specific character
width for their output, which means a hardcopy or a text file might look different
from what would display on the screen. The cmdlets have a -width parameter that
enables you to change the output width, if desired, to accommodate wider tables.
10.8 Another out: GridViews
Out-GridView provides another useful form of output. Note that this isn’t technically
formatting; in fact, Out-GridView entirely bypasses the formatting subsystem. No
Format- cmdlets are called, no formatting instructions are produced, and no text output is displayed in the console window. Out-GridView can’t receive the output of a
Format- cmdlet—it can only receive the regular objects output by other cmdlets.
 Figure 10.7 shows what the grid view looks like.
 
 10.9 Common points of confusion
 As we mentioned at the start of this chapter, the formatting system has most of the
 “gotchas” that trip up PowerShell newcomers. There are two main things that our
 classroom students tend to run across, so we’ll try to help you avoid them.
 10.9.1 Always format right
 It’s incredibly important that you remember one rule from this chapter: format right.
 Your Format- cmdlet should be the last thing on the command line, with Out-File or
 Out-Printer as the only exceptions. The reason for this rule is that the Format- cmdlets produce formatting instructions, and only an Out- cmdlet can properly consume
 those instructions. If a Format- cmdlet is last on the command line, the instructions
 will go to Out-Default (which is always at the end of the pipeline), which will forward
 them to Out-Host, which is happy to work with formatting instructions.
  Try running this command to illustrate the need for this rule:
 Get-Service | Format-Table | Gm
 You’ll notice, as shown in figure 10.8, that Gm isn’t displaying information about your
 service objects because the Format-Table cmdlet doesn’t output service objects. It
 consumes the service objects you pipe in, and it outputs formatting instructions—
 which is what Gm sees and reports on. 

Now try this:
Get-Service | Select Name,DisplayName,Status | Format-Table |
ConvertTo-HTML | Out-File services.html
Go ahead and open Services.html in Internet Explorer, and you’ll see some crazy
results. You didn’t pipe service objects to ConvertTo-HTML; you piped formatting
instructions, so that’s what got converted to HTML. This illustrates why a Format- cmdlet, if you use one, either has to be the last thing on the command line or has to be
second-to-last with the last cmdlet being Out-File or Out-Printer.
 Also know that Out-GridView is unusual (for an Out- cmdlet, at least) in that it
won’t accept formatting instructions and will only accept normal objects. Try these two
commands to see the difference:
PS C:\>Get-Process | Out-GridView
PS C:\>Get-Process | Format-Table | Out-GridView
That’s why we explicitly mentioned Out-File and Out-Printer as the only cmdlets
that should follow a Format- cmdlet (technically, Out-Host can also follow a Formatcmdlet, but there’s no need because ending the command line with the Format- cmdlet will get the output to Out-Host anyway).
10.9.2 One type of object at a time, please
The next thing to avoid is putting multiple kinds of objects into the pipeline. The formatting system looks at the first object in the pipeline and uses the type of that object
to determine what formatting to produce. If the pipeline contains two or more kinds
of objects, the output won’t always be complete or useful.
 For example, run this:
Get-Process; Get-Service
That semicolon allows us to put two commands onto a single command line, without
piping the output of the first cmdlet into the second one. This means both cmdlets
will run independently, but they will put their output into the same pipeline. As you’ll
see if you try this or look at figure 10.9, the output starts out fine, displaying process
objects. But the output breaks down when it’s time to display the service objects.
Rather than producing the table you’re used to, PowerShell reverts to a list. The formatting system isn’t designed to take multiple kinds of objects and make the results
look as attractive as possible.
 What if you want to combine information drawn from two (or more) different
places into a single form of output? You absolutely can, and you can do so in a way that
the formatting system can deal with nicely. But that’s an advanced topic that we won’t
get to in this book.

Figure 10.9 Putting two types of objects into the pipeline at once can confuse
PowerShell’s formatting system.

Above and beyond
Technically, the formatting system can handle multiple types of objects—if you tell it
how. Run Dir | Gm and you’ll notice that the pipeline contains both DirectoryInfo
and FileInfo objects (Gm has no problem working with pipelines that contain multiple kinds of objects and will display member information for all of them). When you
run Dir by itself, the output is perfectly legible. That’s because Microsoft provides a
predefined custom formatting view for DirectoryInfo and FileInfo objects, and
that view is handled by the Format-Custom cmdlet.
Format-Custom is mainly used to display different predefined custom views. You
could technically create your own predefined custom views, but the necessary XML
syntax is complicated and isn’t publicly documented at this time, so custom views
are limited to what Microsoft provides.
Microsoft’s custom views do get a lot of usage, though. PowerShell’s help information is stored as objects, for example, and the formatted help files you see on the
screen are the result of feeding those objects into a custom view.

10.10 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need any computer running PowerShell v3.
See if you can complete the following tasks:
1 Display a table of processes that includes only the process names, IDs, and
whether or not they’re responding to Windows (the Responding property has
that information). Have the table take up as little horizontal room as possible,
but don’t allow any information to be truncated.
    get-process | format-table Name,ID, Responding -autosize -Wrap
    
2 Display a table of processes that includes the process names and IDs. Also
include columns for virtual and physical memory usage, expressing those values
in megabytes (MB).
    get-process | format-table Name, ID,
    @{1='VirtualMB';e={$_.vm/1mb}} -autosize
    @{1='PhysicalMB';e={$_.workingset/1MB}} -autosize
    
3 Use Get-EventLog to display a list of available event logs. (Hint: you’ll need to
read the help to learn the correct parameter to accomplish that.) Format the
output as a table that includes, in this order, the log display name and the retention period. The column headers must be “LogName” and “RetDays.”
    Get-Event-Log - List | Format-Table
    @{1='LogName';e={$_.LogDisplayname/lmb}} -autosize
    @{1='RetDays';e={$_.MinimumRetentionDays/lmb}} -autosize
    
4 Display a list of services so that a separate table is displayed for services that are
started and services that are stopped. Services that are started should be displayed first. (Hint: you’ll use a -groupBy parameter).
Get-Sercice | sort Sratus -descending | format-table -GroupBy Status 

10.11 Further exploration
This is the perfect time to experiment with the formatting system. Try using the three
main Format- cmdlets to create different forms of output. The labs in upcoming
chapters will often ask you to use specific formatting, so you might as well hone your
skills with these cmdlets and start memorizing the more often-used parameters that
we’ve covered in this chapter.
