Filtering and comparisons
Up to this point, you’ve been working with whatever output the shell gave you: all
the processes, all the services, all the event log entries, all the hotfixes. But this type
of output isn’t always going to be what you want. Often you’ll want to narrow down
the results to a few items that specifically interest you. That’s what you’ll learn to do
in this chapter.
11.1 Making the shell give you just what you need
The shell offers two broad models for narrowing down results, and they’re both
referred to as filtering. In the first model, you try to instruct the cmdlet that’s retrieving information for you to retrieve only what you’ve specified. In the second
model, which takes an iterative approach, you take everything the cmdlet gives you
and use a second cmdlet to filter out the things you don’t want.
 Ideally, you’ll use the first model, which we call early filtering, as much as possible. It may be as simple as telling the cmdlet what you’re after. For example, with
Get-Service, you can tell it which service names you want:
Get-Service -name e*,*s*
But if you want Get-Service to return only the running services, regardless of their
names, you can’t tell the cmdlet to do that for you, because it doesn’t offer any
parameters to specify that information.
 Similarly, if you’re using Microsoft’s ActiveDirectory module, all of its Getcmdlets support a -filter parameter. Although you can tell it -filter * to get all
objects, we don’t recommend it because of the load it can impose on a domain

controller in large domains. Instead, you can specify criteria like the following, which
explain precisely what you want:
Get-ADComputer -filter "Name -like '*DC'"
Once again, this technique is ideal because the cmdlet only has to retrieve matching
objects. We call this the filter left technique.
11.2 Filter left
“Filter left” means putting your filtering criteria as far to the left, or toward the beginning, of the command line as possible. The earlier you can filter out unwanted
objects, the less work the remaining cmdlets on the command line will have to do, and
the less unnecessary information will have to be transmitted across the network to
your computer.
 The downside of the filter left technique is that every single cmdlet can implement
its own means of specifying filtering, and every cmdlet will have varying abilities to
perform filtering. With Get-Service, for example, you can only filter on the Name
property of the services. But with Get-ADComputer you can filter on any Active Directory attribute that a Computer object might have. Being effective with the filter left
technique requires you to learn a lot about how various cmdlets operate, which can
mean a somewhat steeper learning curve. But you’ll benefit from better performance.
 When you’re not able to get a cmdlet to do all of the filtering you need, you can
turn to a core PowerShell cmdlet called Where-Object (which has an alias of Where).
This uses a generic syntax, and you can use it to filter any kind of object once you’ve
retrieved it and put it into the pipeline.
 To use Where-Object, you’ll need to learn how to tell the shell what you want to filter, and that involves using the shell’s comparison operators. Interestingly, some filter
left techniques—such as the -filter parameter of the Get- cmdlets in the ActiveDirectory module—use the same comparison operators, so you’ll be killing two birds
with one stone. But some cmdlets (we’re thinking about Get-WmiObject, which we’ll
discuss later in the chapter) use an entirely different filtering and comparison language, which we’ll cover when we discuss those cmdlets.
11.3 Comparison operators
In computers, a comparison always involves taking two objects or values and testing
their relationship to one another. You might be testing to see if they’re equal, or to see
if one is greater than another, or if one of them matches a text pattern of some kind.
You indicate the kind of relationship you want to test by using a comparison operator.
The result of the test is always a Boolean value: True or False. Put another way, either
the tested relationship is as you specified, or it isn’t.
 PowerShell uses the following comparison operators. Note that when comparing
text strings, these aren’t case-sensitive. That means an uppercase letter is seen as equal
to a lowercase letter. 
 -eq—Equality, as in 5 -eq 5 (which is True) or "hello" -eq "help" (which is
False)
 -ne—Not equal to, as in 10 -ne 5 (which is True) or "help" -ne "help" (which
is False, because they’re, in fact, equal, and we were testing to see if they were
unequal)
 -ge and -le—Greater than or equal to, and less than or equal to, as in 10 -ge 5
(True) or Get-Date -le '2012-12-02' (which will depend on when you run
this, and shows how dates can be compared)
 -gt and -lt—Greater than and less than, as in 10 -lt 10 (False) or 100 -gt 10
(True)
For string comparisons, you can also use a separate set of case-sensitive operators if
needed: -ceq, -cne, -cgt, -clt, -cge, -cle.
 If you want to compare more than one thing at once, you can use the Boolean
operators -and and -or. Each of those takes a subexpression on either side, and we
usually enclose them in parentheses to make the line easier to read:
 (5 -gt 10) -and (10 -gt 100) is False, because one or both subexpressions
were False
 (5 -gt 10) -or (10 -lt 100) is True, because at least one subexpression was
True
In addition, the Boolean -not operator reverses True and False. This can be useful
when you’re dealing with a variable or a property that already contains True or False,
and you want to test for the opposite condition. For example, if we wanted to test
whether a process wasn’t responding, we could do the following (we’re going to use
$__ as a placeholder for a process object):
$_.Responding -eq $False
Windows PowerShell defines $False and $True to represent the False and True Boolean values. Another way to write that comparison would be as follows:
-not $_.Responding
Because Responding normally contains True or False, the -not will reverse False to
True. If the process isn’t responding (meaning Responding is False), then our comparison will return True, indicating that the process is “not responding.” We prefer
the second technique because it reads, in English, more like what we’re testing for: “I
want to see if the process isn’t responding.” You’ll sometimes see the -not operator
abbreviated as an exclamation mark (!).
A couple of other comparison operators are useful when you need to compare
strings of text:
 -like accepts * as a wildcard, so you can compare to see if "Hello" -like
"*ll*" (that would be True). The reverse is -notlike, and both are caseinsensitive; use -clike and -cnotlike for case-sensitive comparisons.
-match makes a comparison between a string of text and a regular expression
pattern. -notmatch is its logical opposite, and as you might expect, -cmatch and
-cnotmatch provide case-sensitive versions. Regular expressions are beyond the
scope of what we’ll cover in this book.
The neat thing about the shell is that you can run almost all of these tests right at the
command line (the exception is the one where we used the $_ placeholder—it won’t
work by itself, but you’ll see where it will work in the next section).
TRY IT NOW Go ahead and try any—or all—of these comparisons. Type them
on a line, like 5 -eq 5, hit Return, and see what you get.
You can find the other available comparison operators in the about_comparison
_operators help file, and you’ll learn about a few of the other ones in chapter 25.

Above and beyond
If a cmdlet doesn’t use the PowerShell-style comparison operators discussed in section 11.3, it probably uses the more traditional, programming language-style comparison operators that you might remember from high school or college (or even your
daily work):
 = equality
 <> inequality
 <= less than or equal to
 >= greater than or equal to
 > greater than
 < less than
If Boolean operators are supported, they’re usually the words AND and OR; some
cmdlets may support operators such as LIKE as well. For example, you’ll find support
for all of these operators in the -filter parameter of Get-WmiObject; we’ll repeat
this list when we discuss that cmdlet in chapter 14.
Every cmdlet’s designers get to pick how (and if) they’ll handle filtering; you can often
get examples of what they decided to do by reviewing the cmdlet’s full help, including
the usage examples near the end of the help file.

11.4 Filtering objects out of the pipeline
Once you’ve written a comparison, where do you use it? Well, using the comparison
language we just outlined, you can use it with the -filter parameter of some cmdlets,
perhaps most notably the ActiveDirectory module’s Get- cmdlets. You can also use it
with the shell’s generic filtering cmdlet, Where-Object.
 For example, do you want to get rid of all but the running services?
Get-Service | Where-Object -filter { $_.Status -eq 'Running' }

The -filter parameter is positional, which means you’ll often see this typed without
it, and with the alias Where:
Get-Service | Where { $_.Status -eq 'Running' }
If you get used to reading that aloud, it sounds sensible: “where status equals running.” Here’s how it works: when you pipe objects to Where-Object, it examines each
one of them using its filter. It places one object at a time into the $_ placeholder and
then runs the comparison to see if it’s True or False. If it’s False, the object is
dropped from the pipeline. If the comparison is True, the object is piped out of
Where-Object to the next cmdlet in the pipeline. In this case, the next cmdlet is
Out-Default, which is always at the end of the pipeline (as we discussed in chapter 8)
and which kicks off the formatting process to display your output.
 That $_ placeholder is a special creature: you’ve seen it used before (in chapter
10), and you’ll see it in one or two more contexts. You can only use this placeholder in
the specific places where PowerShell looks for it, and this happens to be one of those
places. As you learned in chapter 10, the period tells the shell that you’re not comparing the entire object, but rather just one of its properties, Status.
 We hope you’re starting to see where Gm comes in handy. It gives you a quick and
easy way to discover what properties an object has, which lets you turn around and use
those properties in a comparison like this one. Always keep in mind that the column
headers in PowerShell’s final output don’t always reflect the property names. For
example, run Get-Process and you’ll see a column like PM(MB); run Get-Process |
Gm and you’ll see that the actual property name is PM. That’s an important distinction:
always verify property names using Gm, not with a Format- cmdlet.

Above and beyond
PowerShell v3 introduced a new “simplified” syntax for Where-Object. You can use
it only when you’re doing a single comparison; if you need to compare multiple items,
you still have to use the original syntax, which is what you’ve seen in this section.
Folks debate whether or not this simplified syntax is helpful. It looks something like
this:
Get-Service | Where Status -eq 'Running'
Obviously, that’s a bit easier to read: it dispenses with the {curly brackets} and
doesn’t require the use of the awkward-looking $_ placeholder. But this new syntax
doesn’t mean you can forget about the old syntax, which you still need for more complex comparisons:
Get-WmiObject -Class Win32_Service |
Where { $_.State -ne 'Running' -and $_.StartMode -eq 'Auto' }
What’s more, there are six years’ worth of examples out on the internet that all use
the old syntax, which means you have to know it to use them. You also have to
know the new syntax, because it will now start cropping up in developer’s examples.
Having to know two sets of syntax isn’t exactly “simplified,” but at least you know
what’s what.

And by the way, we acknowledge that the previous command isn’t an ideal example.
We could have used the -Filter parameter of Get-WmiObject, which would be
more efficient. But we wanted to use this illustration to point out that the “old”
Where-Object syntax still has some uses.

11.5 The iterative command-line model
We want to go on a brief tangent with you now to talk about what we call the PowerShell Iterative Command-Line Model, or PSICLM. (There’s no reason for it to have an
acronym, but it’s fun to try to pronounce.) The idea behind PSICLM is that you don’t
need to construct these large, complex command lines all at once and entirely from
scratch. Start small.
 Let’s say you want to measure the amount of virtual memory being used by the ten
most virtual, memory-hungry processes. But if PowerShell itself is one of those processes, you don’t want it included in the calculation. Let’s take a quick inventory of
what you need to do:
1 Get processes
2 Get rid of everything that’s PowerShell
3 Sort them by virtual memory
4 Only keep the top ten or bottom ten, depending on how we sort them
5 Add up the virtual memory for whatever is left
We believe you know how to do the first three of these steps. The fourth is accomplished using your old friend, Select-Object.
TRY IT NOW Take a moment and read the help for Select-Object. Can you
find any parameters that would enable you to keep the first or last number of
objects in a collection?
We hope you found the answer.
 Finally, you need to add up the virtual memory. This is where you’ll need to find a
new cmdlet, probably by doing a wildcard search with Get-Command or Help. You
might try the Add keyword, or the Sum keyword, or even the Measure keyword.
TRY IT NOW See if you can find a command that would measure the total of a
numeric property like virtual memory. Use Help or Get-Command with the *
wildcard.
As you’re trying these little tasks (and not reading ahead for the answer), you’re making yourself into a PowerShell expert. Once you think you have the answer, you might
start in on the iterative approach.
 To start with, you need to get processes. That’s easy enough:
 TRY IT NOW Follow along in the shell, and run these commands. After each,
 examine the output, and see if you can predict what you need to change for
 the next iteration of the command.
 Next, you need to filter out what you don’t want. Remember, “filter left” means you
 want to get the filter as close to the beginning of the command line as possible. In this
 case, we’ll use Where-Object to do the filtering, because we want it to be the next
 cmdlet. That’s not as good as having the filtering occur on the first cmdlet, but it’s better than filtering later on down the pipeline.
  In the shell, hit the up arrow on the keyboard to recall your last command, and
 then add the next command:
 Get-Process | Where-Object -filter { $_.Name -notlike 'powershell*' }
 We’re not sure if it’s “powershell” or “powershell.exe,” so we’re using a wildcard comparison to cover all our bases. Any process that isn’t like those names will remain in
 the pipeline.
  Run that to test it, and then hit the up arrow again to add the next bit:
 Get-Process | Where-Object -filter { $_.Name -notlike 'powershell*' } |
 Sort VM -descending
 Hitting Return lets you check your work, and the up arrow will let you add the next
 piece of the puzzle:
 Get-Process | Where-Object -filter { $_.Name -notlike 'powershell*' } |
 Sort VM -descending | Select -first 10
 Had you sorted in the default ascending order, you would have wanted to keep the
 -last 10 before adding this last bit:
 Get-Process | Where-Object -filter { $_.Name -notlike 'powershell*' } |
 Sort VM -descending | Select -first 10 |
 Measure-Object -property VM -sum
 We hope you were able to figure out at least the name of that last cmdlet, if not the
 exact syntax used here.
  This model—running a command, examining the results, recalling it, and modifying it for another try—is what differentiates PowerShell from more traditional scripting languages. Because PowerShell is a command-line shell, you get those immediate
 results, and also the ability to quickly and easily modify your command if the results
 weren’t what you expected. You should also be seeing the power you have when you
 combine even the handful of cmdlets you’ve learned to this point in the book.
 11.6 Common points of confusion
 Any time we introduce Where-Object in a class, we usually come across two main sticking points. We tried to hit those concepts hard in the preceding discussion, but if you
 have any doubts, we’ll clear them up now.
 
 11.6.1 Filter left, please
 You want your filtering criteria to go as close to the beginning of the command line as possible. If you can accomplish the filtering you need on the first cmdlet, do so; if not, try to
 filter in the second cmdlet so that the subsequent cmdlets have as little work to do as
 possible.
  Also, try to accomplish filtering as close to the source of the data as possible. For
 example, if you’re querying services from a remote computer and need to use
 Where-Object—as we did in one of this chapter’s examples—consider using PowerShell remoting to have the filtering occur on the remote computer, rather than bringing all of the objects to your computer and filtering them there. You’ll tackle remoting
 in chapter 13, and we’ll mention this idea of filtering at the source again there.
 11.6.2 When $_ is allowed
 The special $_ placeholder is only valid in the places where PowerShell knows to look
 for it. When it’s valid, it contains one object at a time from the ones that were piped
 into that cmdlet. Keep in mind that what’s in the pipeline can and will change
 throughout the pipeline, as various cmdlets execute and produce output.
  Also be careful of nested pipelines—the ones that occur inside a parenthetical
 command. For example, the following can be tricky to figure out:
 Get-Service -computername (Get-Content c:\names.txt |
 Where-Object -filter { $_ -notlike '*dc' }) |
 Where-Object -filter { $_.Status -eq 'Running' }
 Let’s walk through that:
 1 You start with Get-Service, but that isn’t the first command that will execute.
 Because of the parentheses, Get-Content will execute first.
 2 Get-Content is piping its output—which consists of simple String objects—to
 Where-Object. That Where-Object is inside the parentheses, and within its filter, $_ represents the String objects piped in from Get-Content. Only those
 strings that don’t end in “dc” will be retained and output by Where-Object.
 3 The output of Where-Object becomes the result of the parenthetical command, because Where-Object was the last cmdlet inside the parentheses. Therefore, all of the computer names that don’t end in “dc” will be sent to the
 -computername parameter of Get-Service.
 4 Now Get-Service executes, and the ServiceController objects it produces will
 be piped to Where-Object. That instance of Where-Object will put one service
 at a time into its $_ placeholder, and it will keep only those services whose
 status property is Running.
 Sometimes we feel like our eyes are crossing with all the curly braces, periods, and
 parentheses, but that’s how PowerShell works, and if you can train yourself to walk
 through the command carefully, you’ll be able to figure out what it’s doing.
 
 11.7 Lab
 NOTE For this lab, you’ll need a Windows 8 or Windows Server 2012 computer running PowerShell v3.
 Remember that Where-Object isn’t the only way to filter, and it isn’t even the one you
 should turn to first. We’ve kept this chapter brief to allow you more time to work on
 the hands-on examples, so keeping in mind the principle of filter left, try to accomplish
 the following:
 
 1 Import the NetAdapter module (available in the latest version of Windows,
 both client and server). Using the Get-NetAdapter cmdlet, display a list of nonvirtual network adapters (that is, adapters whose Virtual property is False,
 which PowerShell represents with the special $False constant).
    import-module NetAdapter
    get-netadapter -physical
    
 2 Import the DnsClient module (available in the latest version of Windows, both
 client and server). Using the Get-DnsClientCache cmdlet, display a list of A
 and AAAA records from the cache. Hint: if your cache comes up empty, try visiting a few web pages first to force some items into the cache.
    Import-Module DnsClient
    Get-DnsClientCache -type AAAA,A
 
 3 Display a list of hotfixes that are security updates.
    Dir c:\windows\system32\*exe | where {$_.length -gt 5MB}
 
 4 Using Get-Service, is it possible to display a list of services that have a start type
 of Automatic, but that aren’t currently started? Answer “Yes” or “No” to this
 question. You don’t need to write a command to accomplish this.
    Get-Hotfix Description 'Security Update'
 
 5 Display a list of hotfixes that were installed by the Administrator, and which are
 updates. Note that some hotfixes won’t have an “installed by” value—that’s OK.
    get-hotfix -Description Update | where {$_.InstalledBy -mathc "administrator"}
    
 6 Display a list of all processes running with either the name “Conhost” or the
 name “Svchost”.
    get-process -name svchost, conhost
 
 11.8 Further exploration
 Practice makes perfect, so try filtering some of the output from the cmdlets you’ve
 already learned about, such as Get-Hotfix, Get-EventLog, Get-Process, Get-Service,
 and even Get-Command. For example, you might try to filter the output of Get-Command
 to show only cmdlets. Or use Test-Connection to ping several computers, and only
 show the results from computers that didn’t respond. We’re not suggesting that you
 need to use Where-Object in every case, but you should practice using it when it’s
 appropriate.

