
It’s time to put some of your new knowledge to work. In this chapter, we’re not
even going to try and teach you anything new—instead, we’re going to walk you
through a detailed example using what you’ve learned. This is meant to be an absolutely real-world example: we’re going to set ourselves a task, and then let you follow our thought processes as we figure out how to complete it. This chapter is really
the epitome of what this book is all about, because instead of just handing you the
answer on how to do something, we’re helping you realize that you can teach yourself.
12.1 Defining the task
First of all, we’re going to assume that you’re working on Windows 8 or on Windows Server 2012, and that you obviously have PowerShell v3 installed (it comes
with those operating systems). If you don’t have one of those versions of Windows,
we strongly recommend downloading a trial version, if possible, or spinning up a
virtual machine using a service like CloudShare.com. While PowerShell v3 will run
on older versions of Windows, those versions don’t supply the same deep administrative integration as the newest versions of Windows.
 Our goal is to use PowerShell to create a new scheduled task. We want this to be
a real scheduled task, one we could see in Windows’ Task Scheduler when we’re
done. Every day at 3 a.m., we want the task to remove all print jobs from a local
printer named “Accounting.” Let’s say that jobs sometimes get hung, because it’s
an old and recalcitrant piece of hardware, and we want a fresh start every morning.

12.2 Finding the commands
The first step in solving any task is to figure out which commands will do it for you.
We’re going to start a bit backwards, and figure out the printer side of the task first.
That way, we can run the commands interactively to make sure they’re doing what we
think they are. Then, when we go to put them in a scheduled task, we’re only going to
be fighting one problem at a time.
 We start by looking for print commands. Notice that we chose to use *print* as our
keyword, rather than *printer*. Whenever possible, use a shorter form of a word to
get a broader set of results.

PS C:\> help *print*

Name Category Module
---- -------- ------
Add-Printer Function printmanagement
Add-PrinterDriver Function printmanagement
Add-PrinterPort Function printmanagement
Get-PrintConfiguration Function printmanagement
Get-Printer Function printmanagement
Get-PrinterDriver Function printmanagement
Get-PrinterPort Function printmanagement
Get-PrinterProperty Function printmanagement
Get-PrintJob Function printmanagement
Remove-Printer Function printmanagement
Remove-PrinterDriver Function printmanagement
Remove-PrinterPort Function printmanagement
Remove-PrintJob Function printmanagement
Rename-Printer Function printmanagement
Restart-PrintJob Function printmanagement
Resume-PrintJob Function printmanagement
Set-PrintConfiguration Function printmanagement
Set-Printer Function printmanagement
Set-PrinterProperty Function printmanagement
Suspend-PrintJob Function printmanagement
Out-Printer Cmdlet Microsoft.PowerShell.U


TRY IT NOW You should definitely be following along with the commands we
run in this chapter. Make sure you’re seeing what we see, and make sure it’s
giving you the same information that we’re claiming. What’s important here
isn’t accomplishing the task—what’s important is how we figure it out.
That’s promising! There’s Get-PrintJob and Remove-PrintJob. If you look at the
help for Remove-PrintJob, you’ll see that it has an -InputObject parameter, which
accepts pipeline input ByValue. That means we should be able to get a job, and then
pipe it to Remove-PrintJob to remove that job:
-InputObject <CimInstance#MSFT_PrintJob>
 Required? true
 Position? 0
 Accept pipeline input? true (ByValue)
 
 Parameter set name jobObject
  Aliases None
  Dynamic? False
 A quick test on a non-production printer shows that Get-PrintJob -printer
 "Accounting" | Remove-PrintJob will remove all outstanding print jobs. So that’s one
 part of our job. Now for the scheduled task part.
 PS C:\> help *task*
 Name Category Module
 ---- -------- ------
 Disable-NetAdapterEncapsulated... Function NetAdapter
 Enable-NetAdapterEncapsulatedP... Function NetAdapter
 Get-NetAdapterEncapsulatedPack... Function NetAdapter
 Set-NetAdapterEncapsulatedPack... Function NetAdapter
 Get-CertificateNotificationTask Cmdlet PKI
 New-CertificateNotificationTask Cmdlet PKI
 Remove-CertificateNotification... Cmdlet PKI
 Get-ClusteredScheduledTask Function ScheduledTasks
 Get-ScheduledTask Function ScheduledTasks
 Get-ScheduledTaskInfo Function ScheduledTasks
 New-ScheduledTask Function ScheduledTasks
 New-ScheduledTaskAction Function ScheduledTasks
 New-ScheduledTaskPrincipal Function ScheduledTasks
 New-ScheduledTaskSettingsSet Function ScheduledTasks
 New-ScheduledTaskTrigger Function ScheduledTasks
 Great—there are several commands (well, functions, but same thing) in a module
 called ScheduledTasks. Let’s narrow our search down to just that module:
 PS C:\> get-command -module scheduledtasks
 Capability Name
 ---------- ----
 CIM Get-ClusteredScheduledTask
 CIM Get-ScheduledTask
 CIM Get-ScheduledTaskInfo
 CIM New-ScheduledTask
 CIM New-ScheduledTaskAction
 CIM New-ScheduledTaskPrincipal
 CIM New-ScheduledTaskSettingsSet
 Cmdlet, Script New-ScheduledTaskTrigger
 CIM Register-ClusteredScheduledTask
 CIM Register-ScheduledTask
 CIM Set-ClusteredScheduledTask
 CIM Set-ScheduledTask
 CIM Start-ScheduledTask
 CIM Stop-ScheduledTask
 CIM Unregister-ClusteredScheduledTask
 CIM Unregister-ScheduledTask
 Excellent. Now we know what commands we’re after. We just have to figure out how to
 use them.

12.3 Learning to use the commands
We want to create a new scheduled task, so New-ScheduledTask seems like a grand
place to start.
PS C:\> help new-scheduledtask -full
NAME
 New-ScheduledTask
SYNTAX
 New-ScheduledTask [[-Action] <CimInstance#MSFT_TaskAction[]>]
 [[-Trigger] <CimInstance#MSFT_TaskTrigger[]>] [[-Settings]
 <CimInstance#MSFT_TaskSettings>] [[-Principal]
 <CimInstance#MSFT_TaskPrincipal>] [[-Description] <string>]
 [-CimSession <CimSession[]>] [-ThrottleLimit <int>] [-AsJob]
 [<CommonParameters>]
There don’t appear to be any mandatory parameters here, but the help suggests that
-Trigger will be how we specify when the task should run, -Action will be what the
task does, and we can probably ignore everything else. The help file indicates that
those parameters each take an object as input—a TaskTrigger and TaskAction
object, respectively. So we need to figure out how to make those objects. We could just
read the examples at the end of the help, but let’s make this challenging and not do
so for now.
 Fortunately, we still have that list of commands from the ScheduledTasks module,
and the list includes a New-ScheduledTaskTrigger and a New-ScheduledTaskAction
command. Hopefully you can see where this is going:
PS C:\> help New-ScheduledTaskTrigger
NAME
 New-ScheduledTaskTrigger
SYNOPSIS
SYNTAX
 New-ScheduledTaskTrigger [-RandomDelay <TimeSpan>] [-At] <DateTime>
 -Once [<CommonParameters>]
 New-ScheduledTaskTrigger [-DaysInterval <Int32>] [-RandomDelay
 <TimeSpan>] [-At] <DateTime> -Daily [<CommonParameters>]
 New-ScheduledTaskTrigger [-WeeksInterval <Int32>] [-RandomDelay
 <TimeSpan>] [-At] <DateTime> -DaysOfWeek <DayOfWeek[]> -Weekly
 [<CommonParameters>]
 New-ScheduledTaskTrigger [-RandomDelay <TimeSpan>] [[-User] <String>]
 -AtLogOn [<CommonParameters>]
 New-ScheduledTaskTrigger [[-RandomDelay] <TimeSpan>] -AtStartup
 [<CommonParameters>]
Well, we don’t want any random stuff. The second parameter set has mandatory
-Daily and -At parameters, and that seems promising. Let’s see if we can quickly create a trigger using those:
PS C:\> New-ScheduledTaskTrigger -daily -at 0300
WARNING: column "Enabled" does not fit into the display and was removed
Id Frequency Time DaysOfWeek
-- --------- ---- ----------
0 Daily 1/1/0001 12:00:00 AM
No, not quite right. It didn’t like our time format because it created it for midnight.
Let’s try again:
PS C:\> New-ScheduledTaskTrigger -daily -at '3:00 am'
WARNING: column "Enabled" does not fit into the display and was removed.
Id Frequency Time DaysOfWeek
-- --------- ---- ----------
0 Daily 4/18/2012 3:00:00 AM
There we go. So that’s the command to create the trigger we want. Excellent. Notice
that both attempts produced a trigger with ID 0, and that there’s no command in the
module to “Get-ScheduledTaskTrigger,” so that suggests that PowerShell isn’t tracking
these things in memory. The command produces a trigger, and doesn’t store it. Good
to know—and it shows the importance of looking at each piece of data (even a lowly
ID number) and thinking about what it might mean.
 Now for the action:
PS C:\> help New-ScheduledTaskAction
NAME
 New-ScheduledTaskAction
SYNTAX
 New-ScheduledTaskAction [-Execute] <string> [[-Argument] <string>]
 [[-WorkingDirectory] <string>] [-Id <string>] [-CimSession
 <CimSession[]>] [-ThrottleLimit <int>] [-AsJob] [<CommonParameters>]
We have played with scheduled tasks in the GUI before, so we know that
-WorkingDirectory sets the folder in which the task runs. -Argument probably passes
command-line arguments to whatever we’re running, so we’re going to guess that
-Execute specifies whatever it is we want to run. Let’s give it a shot:
PS C:\> New-ScheduledTaskAction -Execute 'dir'
Id :
Arguments :
Execute : dir
WorkingDirectory :
PSComputerName :
Yeah, okay, seems plausible. Let’s try the entire thing:
PS C:\> New-ScheduledTask -Action (New-ScheduledTaskAction -Execute 'Get-Pr
intJob -printer "Accounting"') -Trigger (New-ScheduledTaskTrigger -daily
-at '3:00 am') -Description "Reset accounting printer daily at 3am"

But having run that, we’re not seeing anything in the Task Scheduler GUI (once we
eventually found it in the new “Metro” Start screen, of course). Rats. Back to the command list for the module:
PS C:\> gcm -Module scheduledtasks
Capability Name
---------- ----
CIM Get-ClusteredScheduledTask
CIM Get-ScheduledTask
CIM Get-ScheduledTaskInfo
CIM New-ScheduledTask
CIM New-ScheduledTaskAction
CIM New-ScheduledTaskPrincipal
CIM New-ScheduledTaskSettingsSet
Cmdlet, Script New-ScheduledTaskTrigger
CIM Register-ClusteredScheduledTask
CIM Register-ScheduledTask
CIM Set-ClusteredScheduledTask
CIM Set-ScheduledTask
CIM Start-ScheduledTask
CIM Stop-ScheduledTask
CIM Unregister-ClusteredScheduledTask
CIM Unregister-ScheduledTask
Hmm. There’s that Register-ScheduledTask, which is starting to look interesting.
“New” usually means “make something,” but maybe we have to also “register” the new
task in order for Windows to realize it exists.
NAME
 Register-ScheduledTask
SYNTAX
 Register-ScheduledTask [-TaskName] <string> [[-TaskPath] <string>]
 [-Action] <CimInstance#MSFT_TaskAction[]> [[-Trigger]
 <CimInstance#MSFT_TaskTrigger[]>] [[-Settings]
 <CimInstance#MSFT_TaskSettings>] [[-User] <string>] [[-Password]
 <string>] [[-RunLevel] <RunLevelEnum> {Limited | Highest}]
 [[-Description] <string>] [-Force] [-CimSession <CimSession[]>]
 [-ThrottleLimit <int>] [-AsJob] [<CommonParameters>]
Looks really similar to New-ScheduledTask, only with more. This, for example, has a
-TaskName parameter, where we could presumably give our task a name—that makes
sense. We’re also seeing -User and -Password, which we’d expected to see on a scheduled task. Okay, let’s try this instead:
PS C:\> Register-ScheduledTask -TaskName "ResetAccountingPrinter" -Descript
ion "Resets the Accounting print queue at 3am daily" -Action (New-Scheduled
TaskAction -Execute 'Get-PrintJob -printer "Accounting"') -Trigger (New-Sch
eduledTaskTrigger -daily -at '3:00 am')
WARNING: column "State" does not fit into the display and was removed.
TaskPath TaskName
-------- --------
\ ResetAccountingPrinter

Figure 12.1 Verifying the scheduled task in the Task Scheduler GUI

Well, that looks like it did something. Back to the GUI where—as shown in figure 12.1—
our task exists. SWEET! Sorry... we get excited when these things finally work.
 Awesome. We feel like superheroes right now. But the point isn’t that we got it
done—the point is that we figured out how to get it done. And we really, truly did, too.
When we sat down to write this chapter we deliberately picked a task we’d been told
was possible but had never done before. You’ve seen every bit of exploration and error
that went along with our learning and discovery process.
12.4 Tips for teaching yourself
Again, the real point of this book is to teach you to teach yourself—and that’s what
this chapter has tried to illustrate. Here are a few tips:
 Don’t be afraid of the help, and be sure to read the examples. We say that over
and over and over, and it’s like nobody believes us. We still see students, right in
front of us in classes, secretly going to Google to find examples. What’s so scary
about the help files? If you’re willing to read someone’s blog, why not give the
examples in the help files a shot first?
 Pay attention. Every bit of information on the screen is potentially important—
don’t mentally skip over the stuff that you’re not immediately looking for.
That’s easy to do, but don’t. Instead, look at each thing, and try to figure out

what it’s for, and what information you can derive from it. For example, when
triggers were being created with an ID of 0, rather than each trigger getting a
new, sequential ID number, we felt safe assuming that PowerShell wasn’t storing
those triggers in some list somewhere. That meant we’d need to pass the trigger
from a parenthetical command, rather than creating it in one step and then
retrieving it later.
 Don’t be afraid to fail. Hopefully you’ve got a virtual machine you can play in—
so use it. Students are constantly asking us questions like, “hey, if I do such-andsuch, what will happen?” to which we’ve started replying, “no idea—try it.” Experimentation is good. In a virtual machine, the worst that can happen is you have
to roll back to a snapshot, right? So give it a whirl, whatever you’re working on.
 If one thing doesn’t work, don’t bang your head against a wall with it—try something else. We got the time format wrong when we specified 0300, and we were
too lazy to read the examples to see what was correct. Rather than trying endless permutations—03:00, 03:00:00, and so on—we tried a different tack, putting in '3:00 am' as a string. It worked. Or do the smart thing and read the
examples!
 We used our familiarity with the GUI Task Scheduler to intuit some things about
the commands we ran, such as the -Execute switch. Don’t let the fact that
you’re in a command-line shell erase your past experiences with Windows—try
to think about how what you’re doing now might relate to what you’ve done in
the past.
Obviously, everything gets easier with time, patience, and practice—but be sure that
you’re thinking along the way.
12.5 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need a Windows 8 or Windows Server 2012 computer running PowerShell v3.
Okay, now it’s your turn. We’re assuming that you’re working in a virtual machine or
other machine that it’s okay to mess up a little in the name of learning. Please don’t
do this in a production environment on a mission-critical computer!
 Windows 8 and Windows Server 2012 include a module for working with file shares.
Your task is to create a directory called “LABS” on your computer and share it. For the
sake of this exercise, you can assume the folder and share don’t already exist. Don’t
worry about NTFS permissions, but make sure that the share permissions are set so that
Everyone has read/write access, and local Administrators have full control. Because the
share will be primarily for files, you want to set the share’s caching mode for documents.
Your script should output an object showing the new share and its permissions


12.6 Lab answer
#create the folder
New-item -Path C:\Labs -Type Directory | Out-Null

#create the share
$myShare =New-SmbShare -Name Labs -Path C:\Labs\
-Description "MoL Lab Share" -ChangeAccess Everyone 
-FullAccess Adminisrators -CachingMode Documents

#get the share permissions
$myShare | Get-SmbShareAccess
