We’ve been looking forward to writing this chapter, and dreading it at the same
time. Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) is probably one of the best
things Microsoft has ever offered to administrators. At the same time, it’s also one
of the worst things the company has ever inflicted on us. WMI offers a way to gather
an amazing amount of system information from a computer. But it can sometimes
feel arcane, and the documentation is far from user friendly. In this chapter, we’ll
introduce you to WMI the PowerShell way, showing you how it works and explaining
some of its less-beautiful aspects, to provide you with full disclosure on what you’re
up against.
 We want to emphasize that WMI is an external technology; PowerShell merely
interfaces with it. The focus in this chapter will be on how PowerShell does that,
and not on the underlying guts of WMI itself. If you’d like to explore WMI further,
we’ll offer some suggestions at the end of this chapter. Keep in mind that PowerShell v3 has made some amazing strides in minimizing how much you have to
touch WMI yourself, which greatly improves the situation.

14.1 WMI essentials
A typical Windows computer will contain tens of thousands of pieces of management
information, and WMI seeks to organize that into something that’s approachable and
more or less sensible.
 At the top level, WMI is organized into namespaces. Think of a namespace as a sort
of folder that ties to a specific product or technology. For example, the root\CIMv2
namespace contains all of the Windows operating system and computer hardware
information; the root\MicrosoftDNS namespace includes all of the information
about DNS Server (assuming you’ve installed that role on your computer). On client
computers, root\SecurityCenter contains information about firewall, antivirus, and
antispyware utilities.
NOTE The contents of root\SecurityCenter will differ depending on what’s
installed on your computer, and newer versions of Windows use
root\SecurityCenter2 instead, which is one example of how confusing WMI
can be.
Figure 14.1 shows some of the namespaces on our computer—we generated this by
using the WMI Control snap-in for the Microsoft Management Console (MMC).
 Within a namespace, WMI is divided into a series of classes. A class represents a management component that WMI knows how to query. For example, the
Antivirus-Product class in root\SecurityCenter is designed to hold information
about antispyware products; the Win32_LogicalDisk class in root\CIMv2 is designed to
hold information about logical disks. But even though a class exists on a computer
doesn’t mean that the computer has any of those components: the Win32_TapeDrive
class is present on all versions of Windows, whether or not a tape drive is installed.

Figure 14.1 Browsing the WMI namespaces
NOTE Once again, not every computer contains the same WMI namespaces
or classes. For example, newer Windows computers have a Root
\SecurityCenter2 namespace in addition to the Root\SecurityCenter
namespace; the former, on newer computers, contains all the good stuff.
Let’s look at a quick example of querying the AntiSpywareProduct from
root\SecurityCenter2 so you can see the instance that’s returned:
PS C:\> Get-CimInstance -Namespace root\securitycenter2 -ClassName antispyw
areproduct
NOTE This example requires PowerShell v3, and we’ll explain the
Get-CimInstance command in just a bit.
When you have one or more manageable components, you’ll have an equal number
of instances for that class. An instance is a real-world occurrence of something represented by a class. If your computer has a single BIOS (and they all do), you’ll have 1
instance of Win32_BIOS in root\CIMv2; if your computer has 100 background services
installed, you’ll have 100 instances of Win32_Service. Note that the class names in
root\CIMv2 tend to start with either Win32_ (even on 64-bit machines) or CIM_ (which
stands for Common Information Model, the standard upon which WMI is built). In
other namespaces, those class name prefixes aren’t usually used. Also, it’s possible for
class names to be duplicated across namespaces. It’s rare, but WMI allows for it,
because each namespace acts as a kind of container and boundary. When you’re referring to a class, you’ll also have to refer to its namespace, so that WMI knows where to
look for the class and so that it doesn’t get confused between two classes that have the
same name but live in different namespaces.
 All of these instances and classes and whatnot live in something called the WMI repository. In older versions of Windows, the repository could sometimes become corrupted
and unusable and you would have to rebuild it; that’s less common since Windows 7.
 On the surface, using WMI seems fairly simple: you figure out which class contains
the information you want, query that class’s instances from WMI, and then examine
the instances’ properties to see the management information. In some cases, you may
ask an instance to execute a method in order to initiate an action or start a configuration change.
14.2 The bad news about WMI
Unfortunately, for most of its life (the situation has recently changed), Microsoft
didn’t exercise a lot of internal control over WMI. The company established a set of
programming standards, but the product groups were more or less left to their own
devices for how to implement classes and whether or not to document them. The
result is that WMI can be a confusing mishmash.
 Within the root\CIMv2 namespace, for example, few classes have any methods that
allow you to change configuration settings. Properties are read-only, meaning that you
must have a method to make changes; if a method doesn’t exist, you can’t use WMI to
make changes for that class. When the IIS team adopted WMI (for IIS version 6), they

implemented parallel classes for a lot of elements. A website, for example, could be
represented by one class that had the typical read-only properties, but also by a second
class that had writable properties you could change. Confusing—and this confusion
was made worse by the lack of good documentation on how to use those classes,
because the IIS team originally intended them to be used mainly by their own tools,
not directly by administrators. The IIS team has since backed away from WMI as a
management interface, and since v7.5 has focused on PowerShell cmdlets and a
PSProvider instead.
 Microsoft doesn’t have a rule that says a product has to use WMI, or that if it does
use WMI it must expose every possible component through WMI. Microsoft’s DHCP
server is inaccessible to WMI, as is its old WINS server. Although you can query the configuration of a network adapter, you can’t retrieve its link speed, because that information isn’t supplied. Although most of the Win32_ classes are well documented, few of
the classes in other namespaces are documented at all. WMI isn’t searchable, so the
process of finding the class you need can be time-consuming and frustrating
(although we’ll try to help with that in the next section).
 The good news is that Microsoft is making an effort to provide PowerShell cmdlets
for as many administration tasks as possible. For example, WMI used to be the only
practical way to programmatically restart a remote computer, using a method of the
Win32_OperatingSystem class. Now, PowerShell provides a Restart-Computer cmdlet.
In some cases, cmdlets will use WMI internally, but you won’t have to deal with WMI
directly in those cases. Cmdlets can provide a more consistent interface for you, and
they’re almost always better documented. WMI isn’t going away, but over time you’ll
probably have to deal with it—and its eccentricities—a lot less.
 In fact, in PowerShell v3 (particularly on the newest versions of Windows) you’ll
notice a lot of “CIM” commands, as shown in figure 14.2 (which is the partial output of
Get-Command). In most cases, these are “wrappers” around some piece of WMI, giving
you a more PowerShell-centric way of interacting with WMI. You use these as you would
any command, including asking for help, which makes them more consistent with the
rest of PowerShell and helps to hide some of the underlying WMI eccentricities.
14.3 Exploring WMI
Perhaps the easiest way to get started with WMI is to put PowerShell aside for a second
and explore WMI on its own. We use a free WMI Explorer tool available from SAPIEN
Technologies (http://www.sapien.com/downloads; free registration required). We
locate most of what we need in WMI with this tool. It does require a lot of browsing
and patience—we’re not pretending this is a perfect process—but it eventually gets
us there.
 You don’t need to install the tool, which means you can easily copy it to a USB flash
drive and carry it to whatever computer you’re using. Because each computer can have
different WMI namespaces and classes, you’ll want to run the tool directly on whatever
computer you’re planning to query, so that you can see that computer’s WMI repository.

Figure 14.2 The “CIM” commands are wrappers around WMI classes.

Let’s say we needed to query a bunch of client computers to see what their icon spacing is set to. That’s a task related to the Windows desktop, and it’s a core part of the
operating system, so we started in the root\CIMV2 class, shown in the tree view on the
left side of the WMI Explorer (see figure 14.3). Clicking the namespace brings up a list
of its classes in the right side, and we took a guess on “Desktop” as a keyword. Scrolling
to the right, we eventually found Win32_Desktop and clicked on that. Doing so
enables the details pane at the bottom, and we clicked on the Properties tab to see
what was available. About a third of the way down, we found IconSpacing, which is
listed as an integer.
 Obviously, search engines are another good way to find the class you want. We tend
to prefix queries with “wmi,” as in “wmi icon spacing,” and that will often pull up an
example or two that can point us in the right direction. The example might be
VBScript-related, or might even be in a .NET language like C# or Visual Basic, but
that’s OK because we’re only after the WMI class name. For example, we searched for

Figure 14.3 WMI Explorer

“wmi icon spacing” and turned up http://stackoverflow.com/questions/202971/
formula-or-api-for-calulating-desktop-icon-spacing-on-windows-xp as the first result.
On that page we found some C# code:
ManagementObjectSearcher searcher = new
ManagementObjectSearcher("root\\CIMV2","SELECT * FROM Win32_Desktop");
We’ve no idea what any of that means, but Win32_Desktop looks like a WMI class name.
Our next search will be for that class name, because such a search will often turn up whatever documentation exists. We’ll cover the documentation a bit later in this chapter.
 Another approach is to use PowerShell itself. For example, suppose we wanted to
do something with disks. We’ll start by guessing at the right namespace, but we happen to know that root\CIMv2 contains all of the core OS and hardware stuff, so we’ll
run this command:
PS C:\> Get-WmiObject -Namespace root\CIMv2 -list | where name -like '*dis
*'
 NameSpace: ROOT\CIMv2
Name Methods Properties
---- ------- ----------
CIM_LogicalDisk {SetPowerState, R... {Access, Avail...
Win32_LogicalDisk {SetPowerState, R... {Access, Avail...
Win32_MappedLogicalDisk {SetPowerState, R... {Access, Avail...
CIM_DiskPartition {SetPowerState, R... {Access, Avail...
Win32_DiskPartition {SetPowerState, R... {Access, Avail...
CIM_DiskDrive {SetPowerState, R... {Availability,...
Win32_DiskDrive {SetPowerState, R... {Availability,...
CIM_DisketteDrive {SetPowerState, R... {Availability,...
CIM_DiskSpaceCheck {Invoke} {AvailableDisk...
Win32_LogicalDiskRootDirectory {} {GroupComponen...
Win32_DiskQuota {} {DiskSpaceUsed...
Win32_LogonSessionMappedDisk {} {Antecedent, D...
CIM_LogicalDiskBasedOnPartition {} {Antecedent, D...
Win32_LogicalDiskToPartition {} {Antecedent, D...
CIM_LogicalDiskBasedOnVolumeSet {} {Antecedent, D...
Win32_DiskDrivePhysicalMedia {} {Antecedent, D...
CIM_RealizesDiskPartition {} {Antecedent, D...
Win32_DiskDriveToDiskPartition {} {Antecedent, D...
Win32_OfflineFilesDiskSpaceLimit {} {AutoCacheSize...
Win32_PerfFormattedData_Counters... {} {Caption, Desc...
Win32_PerfRawData_Counters_FileS... {} {Caption, Desc...
Win32_PerfFormattedData_PerfDisk... {} {AvgDiskBytesP...
Eventually, we find Win32_LogicalDisk.
NOTE The classes whose names start with CIM_ are often “base” classes, and
you don’t use them directly. The Win32_ versions of the classes are Windowsspecific. Also note that the Win32_ prefix is used only in this particular
namespace—other namespaces don’t prefix class names that way.

14.4 Choose your weapon: WMI or CIM
In PowerShell v3, you have two ways to interact with WMI:
 The so-called “WMI cmdlets,” such as Get-WmiObject and Invoke-WmiMethod—
These are legacy cmdlets, meaning they still work, but Microsoft isn’t investing
in further development of them. They communicate over remote procedure
calls (RPCs), which can only pass through a firewall if that firewall supports
stateful inspection (in other words, it’s hard).
 The new “CIM cmdlets,” such as Get-CimInstance and Invoke-CimMethod—These
are more or less equivalent to the old “WMI cmdlets,” although they communicate over WS-MAN (implemented by the Windows Remote Management service) instead of using RPCs. This is Microsoft’s way forward, and running
Get-Command -noun CIM* reveals that Microsoft offers a lot more functionality
through these commands.
Make no mistake: all of these commands use the same WMI back end. The main difference is in how they communicate, and in how you use them. On older systems that
don’t have PowerShell installed, or that don’t have Windows Remote Management
enabled, the WMI cmdlets will often still work (the technology was introduced for
Windows NT 4.0 SP3 and later). For newer systems where PowerShell is installed and
Windows Remote Management is enabled, the CIM cmdlets provide the best experience—and are where Microsoft will continue building functionality and making performance improvements.

14.5 Using Get-WmiObject
With the Get-WmiObject cmdlet, you can specify a namespace, a class name, and even
the name of a remote computer—and alternative credentials, if needed—to retrieve
all instances of that class from the computer specified.
 You can even provide filter criteria if you want fewer than all of the instances of the
class. You can get a list of classes from a namespace. Here’s the syntax:
Get-WmiObject -namespace root\cimv2 -list
Note that namespace names use a backslash, not a forward slash.
 To retrieve a class, specify the namespace and class name:
Get-WmiObject -namespace root\cimv2 -class win32_desktop
The root\CIMv2 namespace is the system default namespace on Windows XP Service
Pack 2 and later, so if your class is in that namespace, you don’t need to specify it. Also,
the -class parameter is positional, so if you provide the class name in the first position, the cmdlet works the same.
 Here are two examples, including one that uses the Gwmi alias instead of the full
cmdlet name:
PS C:\> Get-WmiObject win32_desktop
PS C:\> gwmi antispywareproduct -namespace root\securitycenter2
TRY IT NOW You should start following along at this point, running each of
the commands we show you. For commands that include a remote computer
name, you can substitute localhost if you don’t have another remote computer that you can test against.
For many WMI classes, PowerShell has configuration defaults that specify which properties are shown. Win32_OperatingSystem is a good example because it only displays
six of its properties, in a list, by default. Keep in mind that you can always pipe the
WMI objects to Gm or to Format-List * to see all of the available properties; Gm will
also list available methods. Here’s an example:
PS C:\> Get-WmiObject win32_operatingsystem | gm
 TypeName: System.Management.ManagementObject#root\cimv2\Win32_Operating
System
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
Reboot Method System.Managemen...
SetDateTime Method System.Managemen...
Shutdown Method System.Managemen...
Win32Shutdown Method System.Managemen...
Win32ShutdownTracker Method System.Managemen...
BootDevice Property System.String Bo...
BuildNumber Property System.String Bu...
BuildType Property System.String Bu...
Caption Property System.String Ca...
CodeSet Property System.String Co...
CountryCode Property System.String Co...
CreationClassName Property System.String Cr...
We’ve truncated this output to save space, but you’ll see the whole thing if you run the
same command.
 The -filter parameter lets you specify criteria for retrieving specific instances.
This can be a bit tricky to use, so here’s an example of its worst-case use:
PS C:\> gwmi -class win32_desktop -filter "name='COMPANY\\Administrator'"
__GENUS : 2
__CLASS : Win32_Desktop
__SUPERCLASS : CIM_Setting
__DYNASTY : CIM_Setting
__RELPATH : Win32_Desktop.Name="COMPANY\\Administrator"
__PROPERTY_COUNT : 21
__DERIVATION : {CIM_Setting}
__SERVER : SERVER-R2
__NAMESPACE : root\cimv2
__PATH : \\SERVER-R2\root\cimv2:Win32_Desktop.Name="COMPANY
 \\Administrator"
BorderWidth : 1
Caption :
CoolSwitch :
CursorBlinkRate : 530
Description :
DragFullWindows : False
GridGranularity :
IconSpacing : 43
IconTitleFaceName : Tahoma
IconTitleSize : 8
IconTitleWrap : True
Name : COMPANY\Administrator
Pattern : 0
ScreenSaverActive : False
ScreenSaverExecutable :
ScreenSaverSecure :
ScreenSaverTimeout :
SettingID :
Wallpaper :
WallpaperStretched : True
WallpaperTiled : False
There are some things you should notice about this command and its output:
 The filter criteria are usually enclosed in double quotation marks.
 The filter comparison operators aren’t the normal PowerShell -eq or -like
operators. Instead, WMI uses more traditional, programming-like operators,
such as =, >, <, <=, >=, and <>. You can use the keyword LIKE as an operator, and
when you do your comparison value you have to use % as a character wildcard,
as in "NAME LIKE '%administrator%'". Note that you can’t use * as a wildcard,
as you can elsewhere in PowerShell.
CountryCode Property System.String Co...
CreationClassName Property System.String Cr...
We’ve truncated this output to save space, but you’ll see the whole thing if you run the
same command.
 The -filter parameter lets you specify criteria for retrieving specific instances.
This can be a bit tricky to use, so here’s an example of its worst-case use:
PS C:\> gwmi -class win32_desktop -filter "name='COMPANY\\Administrator'"
__GENUS : 2
__CLASS : Win32_Desktop
__SUPERCLASS : CIM_Setting
__DYNASTY : CIM_Setting
__RELPATH : Win32_Desktop.Name="COMPANY\\Administrator"
__PROPERTY_COUNT : 21
__DERIVATION : {CIM_Setting}
__SERVER : SERVER-R2
__NAMESPACE : root\cimv2
__PATH : \\SERVER-R2\root\cimv2:Win32_Desktop.Name="COMPANY
 \\Administrator"
BorderWidth : 1
Caption :
CoolSwitch :
CursorBlinkRate : 530
Description :
DragFullWindows : False
GridGranularity :
IconSpacing : 43
IconTitleFaceName : Tahoma
IconTitleSize : 8
IconTitleWrap : True
Name : COMPANY\Administrator
Pattern : 0
ScreenSaverActive : False
ScreenSaverExecutable :
ScreenSaverSecure :
ScreenSaverTimeout :
SettingID :
Wallpaper :
WallpaperStretched : True
WallpaperTiled : False
There are some things you should notice about this command and its output:
 The filter criteria are usually enclosed in double quotation marks.
 The filter comparison operators aren’t the normal PowerShell -eq or -like
operators. Instead, WMI uses more traditional, programming-like operators,
such as =, >, <, <=, >=, and <>. You can use the keyword LIKE as an operator, and
when you do your comparison value you have to use % as a character wildcard,
as in "NAME LIKE '%administrator%'". Note that you can’t use * as a wildcard,
as you can elsewhere in PowerShell.

The preceding syntax can be a bit easier to parse if you copy it into the PowerShell ISE
and format it a bit:
gwmi -class win32_bios -computer server-r2,localhost |
 format-table
 @{l='ComputerName';e={$_.__SERVER}},
 @{l='BIOSSerial';e={$_.SerialNumber}},
 @{l='OSBuild';e={
 gwmi -class win32_operatingsystem -comp $_.__SERVER |
 select-object -expand BuildNumber}
 } -autosize
Here’s what’s happening:
 Get-WmiObject is querying Win32_BIOS from two computers.
 The results are being piped to Format-Table. Format-Table is being told to
create three custom columns:
– The first column is named ComputerName, and it’s using the __SERVER system property from the Win32_BIOS instance.
– The second column is named BIOSSerial, and it’s using the SerialNumber
property of the Win32_BIOS instance.
– The third column is named OSBuild. This column is executing a whole new
Get-WmiObject query, retrieving the Win32_OperatingSystem class from the
__SERVER system property of the Win32_BIOS instance (of the same computer). That result is being piped to Select-Object, which is selecting the
contents of the BuildNumber property of the Win32_OperatingSystem
instance and using that as the value for the OSBuild column.
That syntax is complex, but it offers powerful results. It’s also a great example of how
much you can achieve by stringing together a few carefully selected PowerShell cmdlets.
 As we’ve mentioned, some WMI classes include methods. You’ll see how to use
those in chapter 16; doing so can be a bit complicated, and the topic deserves its own
chapter.
14.6 Using Get-CimInstance
Get-CimInstance is new in PowerShell v3, and it works a lot like Get-WmiObject with a
few major syntactical differences:
 You use -ClassName instead of -Class (although you only have to type -Class,
so if that’s all you remember, it’s fine).
 There’s no -List parameter to list all the classes in a namespace. Instead, run
Get-CimClass and use the -Namespace parameter to list classes.
 There’s no -Credential parameter; if you intend to query from a remote computer and need to provide alternative credentials, send Get-CimInstance via
Invoke-Command (which you learned in the previous chapter).
For example,
PS C:\> Get-CimInstance -ClassName Win32_LogicalDisk
DeviceID DriveType ProviderName VolumeName Size FreeSpace
-------- --------- ------------ ---------- ---- ---------
A: 2
C: 3 687173... 580806...
D: 5 HB1_CCPA_X64F... 358370... 0
If you want to query a remote computer using alternate credentials, you can use a
command like this:
PS C:\> invoke-command -ScriptBlock { Get-CimInstance -ClassName win32_proc
ess } -ComputerName WIN8 -Credential DOMAIN\Administrator
14.7 WMI documentation
We mentioned earlier that a search engine is often the best way to find whatever WMI
documentation exists. The Win32_ classes are well documented in Microsoft’s MSDN
Library site, but a search engine remains the easiest way to land on the right page.
Enter the name of the class in Google or Bing, and the first hit will usually be a page
on http://msdn.microsoft.com.
14.8 Common points of confusion
Because we’ve spent the last ten chapters telling you to use the built-in PowerShell
help, you might be inclined to run something like help win32_service right inside
PowerShell. Sadly, that won’t work. The operating system itself doesn’t contain any
WMI documentation, so PowerShell’s help function wouldn’t have any place to go
look for it. You’re stuck with whatever help you can find online—and much of that will
be from other administrators and programmers, not from Microsoft. Search for
“root\SecurityCenter”, for example, and you won’t find a single Microsoft documentation page in the results, which is unfortunate.
 The different filter criteria that WMI uses are also common points of confusion.
You should always provide a filter whenever you need anything other than all of the
available instances, but you’ll have to memorize that different filter syntax. The filter
syntax is passed along to WMI and not processed by PowerShell, which is why you have
to use the syntax that WMI prefers, instead of the native PowerShell operators.
 Part of what makes WMI confusing for some of our classroom students is that,
although PowerShell provides an easy way to query information from WMI, WMI isn’t
integrated into PowerShell. WMI is an external technology, and it has its own rules and
its own way of working. Although you can get to it from within PowerShell, it won’t
behave exactly like other cmdlets and techniques that are integrated completely
within PowerShell. Keep that in mind, and watch for little points of confusion that
result from WMI’s individuality.

14.9 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need any computer running PowerShell v3.
Take some time to complete the following hands-on tasks. Much of the difficulty in
using WMI is in finding the class that will give you the information you need, so much
of the time you’ll spend in this lab will be tracking down the right class. Try to think in
keywords (we’ll provide some hints), and use a WMI explorer to quickly search
through classes (the WMI Explorer we use lists classes alphabetically, making it easier
for us to validate our guesses). Keep in mind that PowerShell’s help system can’t help
you find WMI classes.
1 What class can you use to view the current IP address of a network adapter?
Does the class have any methods that you could use to release a DHCP lease?
(Hint: network is a good keyword here.)

You can use the Win32_NetworkAdaptrConfiguration class.

2 Create a table that shows a computer name, operating system build number,
operating system description (caption), and BIOS serial number. (Hint: you’ve
seen this technique, but you’ll need to reverse it a bit and query the OS class
first, then query the BIOS second.)
    get-wmiobject win32_operatingsystem | Select BuildNumber,Caption,
@{l='Computername';e={$_._SERVER}},
@{l='BIOSerialNumber';e={(gwmi win32_bios) .serialnumber }} | ft -auto

3 Query a list of hotfixes using WMI. (Hint: Microsoft formally refers to these as
quick fix engineering.) Is the list different from that returned by the Get-Hotfix
cmdlet?

 get-wmiobject win32_quickfixenginerring 
You should see that the results are similar.

4 Display a list of services, including their current statuses, their start modes, and
the accounts they use to log on.

get-wmionject win32_service | Select Name,State,StartMode, Start-Name

5 Can you find a class that will display a list of installed software products? Do you
consider the resulting list to be complete?

get-cimclass -namespace root/SecurityCenter2 -ClassName *product

TRY IT NOW After you’ve completed this lab, try completing review lab 2,
which you will find in appendix A of this book.


