Working with many objects,
one at a time
The whole point of PowerShell is to automate administration, and that often means
you’ll want to perform some tasks with multiple targets. You might want to reboot
several computers, reconfigure several services, modify several mailboxes, and so on.
In this chapter, you’ll learn three distinct techniques for accomplishing these and
other multiple-target tasks: batch cmdlets, WMI methods, and object enumeration.
16.1 Automation for mass management
We know this isn’t a book about VBScript, but we want to use a VBScript example to
briefly illustrate the way that multiple-target administration—what Don likes to call
mass management—has been approached in the past. Consider this example (you
don’t need to type this in and run it—we’re going to discuss the approach, not the
results):
For Each varService in colServices
 varService.ChangeStartMode("Automatic")
Next
This kind of approach isn’t only common in VBScript but is common throughout
the world of programming. The following steps illustrate what it does:
1 Assume that the variable colServices contains multiple services. It doesn’t
matter how they got in there, because you could retrieve the services in many

different ways. What matters is that you’ve already retrieved the services and put
them into this variable.
2 The For Each construct will go through, or enumerate, the services one at a time.
As it does this, it’ll place each service into the variable varService. Within the
construct then, varService will contain only a single service. If colServices
contained 50 services, then the construct’s contents would execute 50 times,
and each time varService would contain a different one of the 50 services.
3 Within the construct, a method is executed each time—in this example,
ChangeStartMode()—to perform some task.
If you think about it carefully, you’ll realize that this code isn’t doing something to a
bunch of services at once. Instead, it’s doing something to one service at a time,
exactly as you would if you were manually reconfiguring the services by using the
graphical user interface. The only difference is that this code makes the computer go
through the services one at a time.
 Computers are good at repeating things over and over, so this isn’t a horrible
approach. The problem is that this approach requires us to give the computer a longer and fairly complicated set of instructions. Learning the language necessary to give
that set of instructions can take time, which is why a lot of administrators try to avoid
VBScript and other scripting languages.
 PowerShell can duplicate this approach, and we’ll show you how later in this chapter, because sometimes you have to resort to this method. But the approach of having
the computer enumerate objects isn’t the most efficient way to use PowerShell. In fact,
PowerShell offers two other techniques that are easier to learn and easier to type, and
they’re often more powerful.
16.2 The preferred way: “batch” cmdlets
As you’ve learned in several previous chapters, many PowerShell cmdlets can accept
batches, or collections, of objects to work with.
 In chapter 6, for example, you learned how objects can be piped from one cmdlet
to another, like this (please don’t run this—it could crash your computer):
Get-Service | Stop-Service
This is an example of batch administration using a cmdlet. In this case, Stop-Service
is specifically designed to accept one service object, or many service objects, from the
pipeline, and then stop them. Set-Service, Stop-Process, Move-ADObject, and
Move-Mailbox are all examples of cmdlets that accept one or more input objects and
then perform some task or action with each of them. You don’t need to manually enumerate the objects using a construct, as we did in the VBScript example in the previous section. PowerShell knows how to work with batches of objects and can handle
them for you with a less complex syntax.
 These so-called batch cmdlets (that’s our name for them—it’s not an official term)
are our preferred way of performing mass management. For example, let’s suppose

we need to change the start mode of three services. Rather than using an approach
like the VBScript one, we could do this:
Get-Service -name BITS,Spooler,W32Time | Set-Service -startuptype Automatic
In a way, Get-Service is also a kind of batch cmdlet, because it’s capable of retrieving
services from multiple computers. Suppose you need to change those same three services across a set of three computers:
Get-Service -name BITS,Spooler,W32Time -computer Server1,Server2,Server3 |
Set-Service -startuptype Automatic
One potential downside of this approach is that cmdlets that perform an action often
don’t produce any output indicating that they’ve done their job. That means you
won’t have any visual output from either of the preceding commands, which can be
disconcerting. But those cmdlets often have a -passThru parameter, which tells them
to output whatever objects they accepted as input. You could have Set-Service output the same services it modified, and have Get-Service re-retrieve those services to
see if the change took effect.
 Here’s an example of using -passThru with a different cmdlet:
Get-Service -name BITS -computer Server1,Server2,Server3 |
Start-Service -passthru |
Out-File NewServiceStatus.txt
This command would retrieve the specified service from the three computers listed.
The services would be piped to Start-Service, which would not only start them, but
also output the updated service objects. Those service objects would be piped to
Out-File, telling it to store the updated service status in a text file.
 Once more: this is our recommended way to work in PowerShell. If a cmdlet exists
to do whatever you want, you should use it. Ideally, authors write cmdlets to work with
batches of objects, but that isn’t always the case (cmdlet authors are still learning the
best ways to write cmdlets for us administrators), but it’s the ideal.
16.3 The WMI way: invoking WMI methods
Unfortunately, we don’t always have cmdlets that can take whatever action we need,
and that’s true when it comes to the items we can manipulate through Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI, which we tackled in chapter 14).
NOTE We’ll walk you through a brief storyline meant to help you experience
how folks use PowerShell. Some things may seem redundant, but bear with
us—the experience itself is valuable.
For example, consider the Win32_NetworkAdapterConfiguration class in WMI. This
class represents the configuration bound to a network adapter (adapters can have
multiple configurations, but for now let’s assume they have only one configuration
apiece, which is common on client computers). Let’s say that our goal is to enable
DHCP on all of our computer’s Intel network adapters—we don’t want to enable any
of the RAS or other virtual adapters.

 We might start by trying to query the desired adapter configurations, which would
allow us to get something like the following as output:
DHCPEnabled : False
IPAddress : {192.168.10.10, fe80::ec31:bd61:d42b:66f}
DefaultIPGateway :
DNSDomain :
ServiceName : E1G60
Description : Intel(R) PRO/1000 MT Network Connection
Index : 7
DHCPEnabled : True
IPAddress :
DefaultIPGateway :
DNSDomain :
ServiceName : E1G60
Description : Intel(R) PRO/1000 MT Network Connection
Index : 12
To achieve this output, we’d need to query the appropriate WMI class and filter it to
allow only configurations with “Intel” in their descriptions to be included. The following command will do it (notice that the % acts as a wildcard within the WMI filter syntax):
PS C:\> gwmi win32_networkadapterconfiguration
➥-filter "description like '%intel%'"
TRY IT NOW You’re welcome to follow along with the commands we’re running in this section of the chapter. You may need to tweak the commands
slightly to make them work. For example, if your computer doesn’t have
any Intel-made network adapters, you’d need to change the filter criteria
appropriately.
Once we have those configuration objects in the pipeline, we want to enable DHCP on
them (you can see that one of our adapters doesn’t have DHCP enabled). We might
start by looking for a cmdlet named something like “Enable-DHCP.” Unfortunately, we
won’t find it, because there’s no such thing. There aren’t any cmdlets that are capable
of dealing directly with WMI objects in batches.
 Our next step would be to see if the object itself has a method that’s capable of
enabling DHCP. To find out, we’ll pipe those configuration objects to Get-Member (or
its alias, Gm):
PS C:\> gwmi win32_networkadapterconfiguration
➥-filter "description like '%intel%'" | gm
Right near the top of the resulting list, we should see the method we’re after,
EnableDHCP():
TypeName: System.Management.ManagementObject#root\cimv2\Win32_NetworkAd
apterConfiguration
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
DisableIPSec Method System.Management.ManagementB...
EnableDHCP Method System.Management.ManagementB...

EnableIPSec Method System.Management.ManagementB...
EnableStatic Method System.Management.ManagementB...
The next step, which a lot of PowerShell newcomers try, is to pipe the configuration
objects to the method:
PS C:\> gwmi win32_networkadapterconfiguration
➥-filter "description like '%intel%'" | EnableDHCP()
Sadly, that won’t work. You can’t pipe objects to a method; you can only pipe to a
cmdlet. EnableDHCP isn’t a PowerShell cmdlet. Rather, it’s an action that’s directly
attached to the configuration object itself. The old, VBScript-style approach would
look a lot like the VBScript example we showed you at the start of this chapter, but
with PowerShell you can do something simpler.
 Although there’s no “batch” cmdlet called Enable-DHCP, you can use a generic
cmdlet called Invoke-WmiMethod. This cmdlet is specially designed to accept a batch
of WMI objects, such as our Win32_NetworkAdapterConfiguration objects, and to
invoke one of the methods attached to those objects. Here’s the command we’d run:
PS C:\> gwmi win32_networkadapterconfiguration
➥-filter "description like '%intel%'" |
➥Invoke-WmiMethod -name EnableDHCP
You have a few things to keep in mind:
 The method name isn’t followed by parentheses.
 The method name isn’t case-sensitive.
 Invoke-WmiMethod can accept only one kind of WMI object at a time. In this
case, we’re sending it only Win32_NetworkAdapterConfiguration objects,
which means it’ll work as expected. It’s OK to send it more than one object
(that’s the whole point, in fact), but all of the objects have to be of the same type.
 You can use -WhatIf and -Confirm with Invoke-WmiMethod. But you can’t use
those when calling a method directly from an object.
The output of Invoke-WmiMethod can be a little confusing. WMI always produces a
result object, and it has a lot of system properties (whose names start with two underscore characters). In our case, the command produced the following:
__GENUS : 2
__CLASS : __PARAMETERS
__SUPERCLASS :
__DYNASTY : __PARAMETERS
__RELPATH :
__PROPERTY_COUNT : 1
__DERIVATION : {}
__SERVER :
__NAMESPACE :
__PATH :
ReturnValue : 0
__GENUS : 2
__CLASS : __PARAMETERS
__SUPERCLASS :

__DYNASTY : __PARAMETERS
__RELPATH :
__PROPERTY_COUNT : 1
__DERIVATION : {}
__SERVER :
__NAMESPACE :
__PATH :
ReturnValue : 84
The only useful information in the preceding output is the one property that doesn’t
start with two underscores: ReturnValue. That number tells us the result of the operation. A Google search for “Win32_NetworkAdapterConfiguration” turns up the documentation page, and we can then click through to the EnableDHCP method to see the
possible return values and what they mean. Figure 16.1 shows what we discovered:
 Zero means success, whereas 84 means that the IP isn’t enabled on that adapter
configuration and DHCP can’t be enabled. But which bit of the output went with
which of our two network adapter configurations? It’s difficult to tell, because the output doesn’t tell you which specific configuration object produced it. That’s unfortunate, but it’s the way WMI works.

202 CHAPTER 16 Working with many objects, one at a time
Invoke-WmiMethod will work for most situations where you have a WMI object that
has a method that you want to execute. It works well when querying WMI objects from
remote computers too. Our basic rule is, “if you can get to something by using
Get-WmiObject, then Invoke-WmiObject can execute its methods.”
 If you recall what you learned in chapter 14, you’ll know that Get-WmiObject and
Invoke-WmiMethod are the “legacy” cmdlets for working with WMI; their successors are
Get-CimInstance and Invoke-CimMethod. They work more or less the same way:
PS C:\> Get-CimInstance -classname win32_networkadapterconfiguration
➥-filter "description like '%intel%'" |
➥Invoke-CimMethod -methodname EnableDHCP
In chapter 14, we offered suggestions for when to use WMI or CIM, and those apply
here: WMI works with the broadest range of computers (currently), although it
requires difficult-to-firewall RPC network traffic; CIM requires the newer and easier
WS-MAN traffic, but that isn’t installed by default on older versions of Windows.
 But wait—there’s one more thing. We’re discussing WMI in this section, and back
in chapter 14 we mentioned that Microsoft had done a lot to inadvertently hide WMI
from you, wrapping key WMI functionality into cmdlets. Try running help
Set-NetIPAddress in PowerShell. On a newer version of Windows, you’ll find a great
cmdlet that wraps around much of the underlying WMI complexity. Instead of all this
WMI fussing, we could have used that cmdlet to change the IP address. That’s one of
the real lessons here: Even if you’ve read about something on the internet, don’t
assume PowerShell v3 doesn’t offer a better way. Much of what’s posted on the internet is based on PowerShell v1 and v2, and the cmdlet coverage in v3 is at least four or
five times better.
16.4 The backup plan: enumerating objects
Unfortunately, we’ve run across a few situations where Invoke-WmiObject couldn’t
execute a method—it kept returning weird error messages. We’ve also run into situations where we have a cmdlet that can produce objects, but we know of no batch
cmdlet to which we can pipe those objects to take some kind of action. In either case,
you can still perform whatever task you want to perform, but you’ll have to fall back
on the old VBScript-style approach of instructing the computer to enumerate the
objects and perform your task against one object at a time. PowerShell offers two ways
to accomplish this: one is using a cmdlet, and the other is using a scripting construct.
We’ll focus on the first technique in this chapter, and we’ll save the second for
chapter 21, which dives into PowerShell’s built-in scripting language.
 As an example of how to do this, we’ll use the Win32_Service WMI class. Specifically, we’ll use the Change() method. This is a complex method that can change several elements of a service at once. Figure 16.2 shows its online documentation (which
we found by searching for “Win32_Service” and then clicking on the Change method).
 Reading this page, you’ll discover that you don’t have to specify every single parameter of the method. You can specify Null (which in PowerShell is in the special built-in
$null variable) for any parameters that you want to omit.

For this example, we want to change the service’s startup password, which is the
eighth parameter. To do this, we’ll need to specify $null for the first seven parameters. That means our method execution might look something like the following:
Change($null, $null, $null, $null, $null, $null, $null, "P@ssw0rd")
By the way, neither Get-Service nor Set-Service are capable of displaying or setting
a service’s logon password. But WMI can do it, so we’re using WMI.
 Because we can’t use the Set-Service batch cmdlet, which would normally be our
preferred approach, we’ll try our second approach, which is to use Invoke-WmiMethod.
The cmdlet has a parameter, -ArgumentList, where we can specify the arguments for
the method. The following is an example of what we tried, along with the results we
received:
PS C:\> gwmi win32_service -filter "name = 'BITS'" | invoke-wmimethod -name
 change -arg $null,$null,$null,$null,$null,$null,$null,"P@ssw0rd"
Invoke-WmiMethod : Input string was not in a correct format.
At line:1 char:62
+ gwmi win32_service -filter "name = 'BITS'" | invoke-wmimethod <<<< -nam
Figure 16.2 Documentation page for the Change() method of Win32_Service

e change -arg $null,$null,$null,$null,$null,$null,$null,"P@ssw0rd"
 + CategoryInfo : NotSpecified: (:) [Invoke-WmiMethod], Forma
 tException
 + FullyQualifiedErrorId : System.FormatException,Microsoft.PowerShell
 .Commands.InvokeWmiMethod
NOTE We’re using Get-WmiObject, but Get-CimInstance has virtually the
same syntax.
At this point, we have to make a decision. It’s possible that we’re running the command incorrectly, so we have to decide if we want to spend a lot of time figuring it out.
It’s also possible that Invoke-WmiMethod doesn’t work well with the Change() method,
in which case we could be spending a lot of time trying to fix something over which we
have no control.
 Our usual choice in these situations is to try a different approach: we’re going to
ask the computer (well, the shell) to enumerate the service objects, one at a time, and
execute the Change() method on each of them, one at a time. To do this, we’ll use the
ForEach-Object cmdlet:
PS C:\> gwmi win32_service -filter "name = 'BITS'" | foreach-object {$_.cha
nge($null,$null,$null,$null,$null,$null,$null,"P@ssw0rd") }
__GENUS : 2
__CLASS : __PARAMETERS
__SUPERCLASS :
__DYNASTY : __PARAMETERS
__RELPATH :
__PROPERTY_COUNT : 1
__DERIVATION : {}
__SERVER :
__NAMESPACE :
__PATH :
ReturnValue : 0
In the documentation, we found that a ReturnValue of 0 meant success, which means
we’ve achieved our goal. But let’s look at that command in more detail, with some
nicer formatting:
Get-WmiObject Win32_Service -filter "name = 'BITS'" |
➥ForEach-Object -process {
➥ $_.change($null,$null,$null,$null,$null,$null,$null,"P@ssw0rd")
➥}
This command has lots going on. The first line should make sense: we’re using
Get-WmiObject to retrieve all instances of Win32_Service that match our filter criteria, which is looking for services that have the name “BITS.” (As usual, we’re picking
on the BITS service because it’s less essential than some others we could have picked,
and breaking it won’t crash our computer.) We’re piping those Win32_Service objects
to the ForEach-Object cmdlet.
 Let’s break down the previous example into its component elements:


 First, you’ll see the cmdlet name: ForEach-Object.
 Next, we’re using the -Process parameter to specify a script block. We didn’t
originally type the -Process parameter name, because it’s a positional parameter. But that script block—everything contained within the curly braces—is the
value for the -Process parameter. We went ahead and included the parameter
name when we reformatted the command for easier reading.
 ForEach-Object will execute its script block once for each object that was piped
into ForEach-Object. Each time the script block executes, the next piped-in
object will be placed into the special $_ placeholder.
 By following $_ with a period, we’re telling the shell we want to access a property or method of the current object.
 In the example, we’re accessing the Change() method. Note that the method’s
parameters are passed as a comma-separated list, contained within parentheses.
We’ve used $null for the parameters we don’t want to change and provided our
new password as the eighth parameter. The method accepts more parameters,
but because we don’t want to change the ninth, tenth, or eleventh ones, we can
omit them entirely. (We could also have specified $null for the last three
parameters.)
We’ve definitely covered a complicated syntax. Figure 16.3 breaks it down for you:
You can use this exact same pattern for any WMI method. Why would you ever use
Invoke-WmiMethod instead? Well, it usually does work, and it’s a bit easier to type and
read. But if you’d prefer to only have to memorize one way of doing things, this
ForEach-Object way works well.
 We have to caution you that the examples you see on the internet might be a lot
less easy to read. PowerShell gurus often tend to use aliases, positional parameters,
and shortened parameter names, which reduces readability (but saves on typing).
Here’s the same command again, in super-short form:
PS C:\> gwmi win32_service -fi "name = 'BITS'" |
➥% {$_.change($null,$null,$null,$null,$null,$null,$null,"P@ssw0rd") }
Let’s review what we changed:
 We used the alias Gwmi instead of Get-WmiObject.
 We abbreviated -filter to -fi.
Figure 16.3 Breaking down the ForEach-Object cmdlet

 We used the % alias instead of ForEach-Object. Yes, the percent sign is an alias
to that cmdlet. We find that to be tough to read, but lots of folks use it.
 We removed the -process parameter name again, because it’s a positional
parameter.
We don’t like using aliases and abbreviated parameter names when we’re sharing
scripts, posting them in our blogs, and so forth, because it makes them too difficult for
someone else to read. If you’re going to save something in a script file, it’s worth your
time to type everything out (or use Tab completion to let the shell type it out for you).
 If you ever want to use this example, there are a few things you might change (as
illustrated in figure 16.4):
 You would change the WMI class name, and your filter criteria, to retrieve whatever WMI objects you want.
 You would modify the method name from Change to whatever method you want
to execute.
 You would modify the method’s parameter (also called argument) list to whatever your method needs. This is always a comma-separated list contained within
parentheses. It’s OK for the parentheses to be completely empty for methods
that have no parameters, such as the EnableDHCP() method we introduced earlier in this chapter.
Was this approach the best way to achieve our goal? Looking at the help for
Set-Service, we see that it doesn’t offer a way to change passwords, which
Get-Wmi-Object and Get-CimInstance both do. This leads us to conclude that, even
in PowerShell v3, WMI is the way to go for this particular task.
16.5 Common points of confusion
The techniques we’ve covered in this chapter are among the most difficult in PowerShell, and they often cause the most confusion in our classes. Let’s look at some of the
problems students tend to run into, and provide some alternative explanations that
we hope will help you avoid the same issues.
Figure 16.4 The changes you would make to the previous example to execute a different
WMI method

16.5.1 Which way is the right way?
We use the term batch cmdlet or action cmdlet to refer to any cmdlet that performs some
action against a group, or collection, of objects all at once. Rather than having to
instruct the computer to “go through this list of things, and perform this one action
with each of those things,” you can send the whole group to a cmdlet, and the cmdlet
handles it.
 Microsoft is getting better about providing these kinds of cmdlets with its products,
but its coverage isn’t 100% yet (and probably won’t be for many years, because of the
many complex Microsoft products that exist). But when a cmdlet does exist, we prefer
to use it. That said, other PowerShell developers prefer alternate ways, depending on
what they learned first and what they remember most easily. All of the following are
exactly the same:
Get-Service -name *B* | Stop-Service
Get-Service -name *B* | ForEach-Object { $_.Stop() }
Get-WmiObject Win32_Service -filter "name LIKE '%B%' |
➥Invoke-WmiMethod -name StopService
Get-WmiObject Win32_Service -filter "name LIKE '%B%' |
➥ForEach-Object { $_.StopService() }
Stop-Service -name *B*
Let’s look at how each approach works:
 The first approach is to use a batch cmdlet B. Here, we’re using Get-Service
to retrieve all services with a “B” in their name, and then stop them.
 The second approach is similar. But rather than using a batch cmdlet, we’re
piping the services to ForEach-Object, and asking it to execute each service’s
Stop() method C.
 The third technique is to use WMI, rather than the shell’s native servicemanagement cmdlets D. We’re retrieving the desired services (again, any with
“B” in their name), and piping them to Invoke-WmiMethod. We’re telling it to
invoke the StopService method, which is the method name that the WMI service objects use.
 The fourth way uses ForEach-Object instead of Invoke-WmiMethod but accomplishes exactly the same thing E. This is a combination of C and D, not a
whole new way of doing things.
 The fifth technique uses Stop-Service F directly, because its -Name parameter
(in PowerShell v3) accepts wildcards.
Heck, there’s even a sixth approach—using PowerShell’s scripting language to do the
same thing. You’ll find lots of ways to accomplish almost anything in PowerShell, and
none of them are wrong. Some are easier than others to learn, remember, and repeat,
which is why we’ve focused on the techniques we have, in the order that we did.
B Batch cmdlet
C ForEach-Object
D WMI
WMI and
E ForEach-Object
F Stop-Service

 Our examples also illustrate some important differences between using native
cmdlets and WMI:
 Native cmdlets’ filtering criteria usually use * as a wildcard character, where
WMI filtering uses the percent sign (%)—don’t confuse that percent sign for the
ForEach-Object alias. This percent sign is enclosed within the value of
Get-WmiObject’s -filter parameter, and it isn’t an alias.
 Native objects often have similar capabilities to WMI ones, but the syntax may differ. In our example, the ServiceController objects produced by Get-Service
have a Stop() method; when we access those same services through the WMI
Win32_Service class, the method name becomes StopService().
 Native filtering often uses native comparison operators, such as -eq; WMI uses
programming-style operators such as = or LIKE.
Which should you use? It doesn’t matter, because there’s no right way. You may even
end up using a mix of these, depending on the circumstances and the capabilities that
the shell is able to offer you for the task at hand.
16.5.2 WMI methods versus cmdlets
When should you use a WMI method or a cmdlet to accomplish a task? It’s a simple
choice:
 If you retrieved something by using Get-WmiObject, you’ll take action on that
something by using a WMI method. You can execute the method by using
Invoke-WmiMethod or the ForEach-Object approach.
 If you retrieved something by using an approach other than Get-WmiObject,
you’ll use a native cmdlet to take action against that something. Or, if whatever
you retrieved has a method but no supporting cmdlet, you might use the
ForEach-Object approach to execute that method.
Notice that the lowest common denominator here is ForEach-Object: its syntax is perhaps the most difficult, but you can always use it to accomplish whatever task you need
to do.
 You can never pipe anything to a method. You can only pipe from one cmdlet to
another. If a cmdlet doesn’t exist to do what you need, but a method does, then you
pipe to ForEach-Object and have it execute the method.
 For example, suppose you retrieve something using a Get-Something cmdlet. You
want to delete that something, but there’s no Delete-Something or Remove-Something
cmdlet. But the something objects do have a Delete method. You can do this:
Get-Something | ForEach-Object { $_.Delete() }
16.5.3 Method documentation
Always remember that piping objects to Get-Member reveals methods. Again, let’s use
the fictional Get-Something cmdlet as an example:
Get-Something | Get-Member

PowerShell’s built-in help system doesn’t document WMI methods; you’ll need to use a
search engine (usually searching on the WMI class name) to locate WMI method
instructions and examples. You also won’t find methods of non-WMI objects documented in PowerShell’s built-in help system. For example, if you get a member list for
a service object, you can see that methods named Stop and Start exist:
TypeName: System.ServiceProcess.ServiceController
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
Name AliasProperty Name = ServiceName
RequiredServices AliasProperty RequiredServices = ServicesDepe...
Disposed Event System.EventHandler Disposed(Sy...
Close Method System.Void Close()
Continue Method System.Void Continue()
CreateObjRef Method System.Runtime.Remoting.ObjRef ...
Dispose Method System.Void Dispose()
Equals Method bool Equals(System.Object obj)
ExecuteCommand Method System.Void ExecuteCommand(int ...
GetHashCode Method int GetHashCode()
GetLifetimeService Method System.Object GetLifetimeService()
GetType Method type GetType()
InitializeLifetimeService Method System.Object InitializeLifetim...
Pause Method System.Void Pause()
Refresh Method System.Void Refresh()
Start Method System.Void Start(), System.Voi...
Stop Method System.Void Stop()
ToString Method string ToString()
WaitForStatus Method System.Void WaitForStatus(Syste...
To find the documentation for these, focus on the TypeName, which in this case is
System.ServiceProcess.ServiceController. Search for that complete type name in
a search engine, and you’ll usually come across the official developer documentation
for that type, which will lead to the documentation for the specific method you’re
after.
16.5.4 ForEach-Object confusion
The ForEach-Object cmdlet has a punctuation-heavy syntax, and adding in a
method’s own syntax can create an ugly command line. We’ve compiled some tips for
breaking any mental logjams:
 Try to use the full cmdlet name instead of its % or ForEach alias. The full name
can be easier to read. If you’re using someone else’s example, replace aliases
with the full cmdlet names.
 The script block enclosed in curly braces executes once for each object that’s
piped into the cmdlet.
 Within the script block, the $_ represents one of the piped-in objects.
 Use $_ by itself to work with the entire object you piped in; follow $_ with a
period to work with individual methods or properties.

 Method names are always followed by parentheses, even if the method doesn’t
require any parameters. When parameters are required, they’re delimited by
commas and included within the parentheses.
16.6 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need any computer running PowerShell v3.
Try to answer the following questions and complete the specified tasks. This is an
important lab, because it draws on skills you’ve learned in many previous chapters,
and you should be continuing to use and reinforce these skills as you progress
through the remainder of this book.
1 What method of a ServiceController object (produced by Get-Service) will
pause the service without stopping it completely?

get-service | Get-Member -MemberType Method and you should see a Pause() method

2 What method of a Process object (produced by Get-Process) would terminate
a given process?

Find the methods like this: get-process | Get-Member -MemberType Method and you should see a Kill() method

3 What method of a WMI Win32_Process object would terminate a given process?

Search MSDN documentation for the Win32_Process class


4 Write four different commands that could be used to terminate all processes
named “Notepad”, assuming that multiple processes might be running under
that same name.

get-process Notepad | stop-process 
stop-process -name Notepad
get-process notepad | foreach {$_.Kill() }
Get-WmiObject win32 process -filter {name='notepad.exe} |
Invoke-WmiMethod -Name Terminate  
