
Security alert!
By now, you’re probably starting to get a feel for how powerful PowerShell can be—
and you’re wondering if maybe all of that power might be a security problem. It
might be. Our goal in this chapter is to help you understand exactly how PowerShell
can impact security in your environment, and to show you how to configure PowerShell to provide exactly the balance of security and power you require.
17.1 Keeping the shell secure
When PowerShell was introduced in late 2006, Microsoft didn’t exactly have a spotless record on security and scripting. After all, VBScript and Windows Script Host
(WSH) were probably two of the most popular virus and malware vectors of the
time, serving as entry points for such infamous viruses as “I Love You,” “Melissa,”
and many others. When the PowerShell team announced that they were creating a
new command-line shell that would offer unprecedented power and functionality,
as well as scripting capabilities, we’re sure alarms went off, people were evacuated
from buildings, and everyone gnashed their teeth in dismay.
 But it’s OK. PowerShell was created after the famous “Trustworthy Computing
Initiative” that Bill Gates started within Microsoft. That initiative had a real effect
within the company: each product team is required to have a skilled software security expert sit in on their design meetings, code reviews, and so forth. That expert is
referred to as—and we’re not making this up—the product’s “Security Buddy.”
PowerShell’s Security Buddy was one of the authors of Writing Secure Code, Microsoft’s own bible for writing software that’s less easily exploited by attackers. You can
be assured that PowerShell is as secure as any such product can possibly be—at

least, it’s that secure by default. Obviously, you can change the defaults, but when you
do that, you should consider the security ramifications, and not only the functional
ones. That’s what this chapter will help you accomplish.
17.2 Windows PowerShell security goals
We need to be clear about what PowerShell does and doesn’t do when it comes to
security, and the best way to do that is to outline some of PowerShell’s security goals.
 First and foremost, PowerShell doesn’t apply any additional layers of permissions
on anything it touches. That means PowerShell will only enable you to do what you
already have permission to do. If you can’t create new users in Active Directory by
using the graphical console, you won’t be able to do so in PowerShell either. PowerShell is another means of exercising whatever permissions you already have.
 PowerShell is also not a way to bypass any existing permissions. Let’s say you want
to deploy a script to your users, and you want that script to do something that your
users don’t normally have permission to do. That script isn’t going to work for them.
If you want your users to do something, you need to give them permission to do it;
PowerShell can only accomplish things that the person running a command or script
already has permission to do.
 PowerShell’s security system isn’t designed to prevent anyone from typing in, and
running, whatever commands they have permission to execute. The idea is that it’s
somewhat difficult to trick a user into typing a long, complicated command, so PowerShell doesn’t apply any security beyond the user’s existing permissions. But we know
from past experience that it’s easy to trick users into running a script, which might
well contain malicious commands. This is why most of PowerShell’s security is
Above and beyond
It’s beyond the scope of this book, but we do want you to be aware of other ways to
let your users execute a script that runs under credentials other than their own. You
can typically accomplish this through a technique called script packaging, and it’s a
feature of some commercial script development environments, such as SAPIEN PrimalScript (www.primaltools.com).
After creating a script, you use the packager to bundle the script into an executable
(.EXE) file. This isn’t compilation in the programming sense of the term: the executable isn’t standalone, and it requires that PowerShell be installed in order to run. You
can configure the packager to encrypt alternative credentials into the executable.
That way, when someone runs the executable, it launches the packaged script under
whatever credentials you specify, rather than under the user’s own credentials.
The packaged credentials aren’t 100 percent safe. The package does include the
username and password, although most packagers adequately encrypt them. It’s
safe to say that most users won’t be able to discover the username and password,
but it’s completely possible for a skilled encryption expert to decrypt the username
and password.

designed with the goal of preventing users from unintentionally running scripts. The
“unintentionally” part is important: nothing in PowerShell’s security is intended to
prevent a determined user from running a script. The idea is only to prev
prevent users
from being tricked into running scripts from untrusted sources.
 PowerShell’s security is also not a defense against malware. Once you have malware
on your system, that malware can do anything you have permission to do. It might use
PowerShell to execute malicious commands, but it might as easily use any of a dozen
other techniques to damage your computer. Once you have malware on your system,
you’re “owned,” and PowerShell isn’t a second line of defense. You’ll continue to need
antimalware software to prevent malware from getting onto your system in the first
place. This is a hugely important concept that a lot of people miss: even though a
piece of malware might use PowerShell to do harm doesn’t make that malware PowerShell’s problem. Your antimalware software must stop the malware. Nothing in PowerShell is designed or intended to protect an already compromised system.
17.3 Execution policy and code signing
The first security measure PowerShell includes is an execution policy. This is a machinewide setting that governs the scripts that PowerShell will execute. As we stated earlier
in this chapter, the intent of this setting is to help prevent users from being tricked
into running a script.
17.3.1 Execution policy settings
The default setting is Restricted, which prevents scripts from being executed at all.
That’s right: by default, you can use PowerShell to interactively run commands, but
you can’t use it to run scripts. If you try, you’ll get the following error message:
File C:\test.ps1 cannot be loaded because the execution of scripts is disa
bled on this system. Please see "get-help about_signing" for more details.
At line:1 char:7
+ ./test <<<<
 + CategoryInfo : NotSpecified: (:) [], PSSecurityException
 + FullyQualifiedErrorId : RuntimeException
You can view the current execution policy by running Get-ExecutionPolicy. You can
change the execution policy in one of three ways:
 By running the Set-ExecutionPolicy command. This changes the setting in the
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE portion of the Windows registry and usually must be run
by an administrator, because regular users don’t have permission to write to
that portion of the registry.
 By using a Group Policy object (GPO). Windows Server 2008 R2 comes with the Windows PowerShell-related settings built right in; for older domain controllers you
can download an ADM template to extend Group Policy. You’ll find it at http://
mng.bz/U6tJ. You can also visit http://download.microsoft.com and punch in
“PowerShell ADM” as a search term.

As shown in figure 17.1, the PowerShell settings are located under Computer
Configuration > Policies > Administrative Templates > Windows Components >
Windows PowerShell. Figure 17.2 displays the policy setting as enabled. When
configured via a Group Policy object, the setting in the Group Policy will override any local setting. In fact, if you try to run Set-ExecutionPolicy, it’ll work,
but a warning message will tell you that your new setting had no effect due to a
Group Policy override.
 By manually running PowerShell.exe and using its -ExecutionPolicy command-line
switch. When you run it in this fashion, the specified execution policy will override any local setting as well as any Group Policy–defined setting.
You can set the execution policy to one of five settings (note that the Group Policy
object only provides access to the middle three of the following list):
 Restricted—This is the default, and scripts aren’t executed. The only exceptions are a few Microsoft-supplied scripts that set up PowerShell’s default configuration settings. Those scripts carry a Microsoft digital signature and won’t
execute if modified.
 AllSigned—PowerShell will execute any script that has been digitally signed by
using a code-signing certificate issued by a trusted Certification Authority (CA).
Figure 17.1 Finding the Windows PowerShell settings in a Group Policy object

 RemoteSigned—PowerShell will execute any local script, and will execute
remote scripts if they’ve been digitally signed by using a code-signing certificate
issued by a trusted CA. “Remote scripts” are those that exist on a remote computer, usually accessed by a Universal Naming Convention (UNC) path. Scripts
marked as having come from the internet are also considered “remote”; Internet Explorer, Firefox, and Outlook all mark downloads as having come from
the internet. Some versions of Windows can distinguish between internet paths
and UNC paths; in those cases, UNC paths on the local network aren’t considered “remote.”
 Unrestricted—All scripts will run. We don’t like nor recommend this setting,
because it provides too little protection.
 Bypass—This special setting is intended for use by application developers who
are embedding PowerShell within their application. This setting bypasses the
configured execution policy and should be used only when the hosting application is providing its own layer of script security.
Figure 17.2 Changing the Windows PowerShell execution policy in a Group Policy object


Microsoft recommends that you use RemoteSigned when you want to run scripts, and
that you use it only on computers where scripts must be executed. According to
Microsoft, all other computers should be left at Restricted. The company says that
RemoteSigned provides a good balance between security and convenience; AllSigned
is stricter but it requires all of your scripts to be digitally signed. The PowerShell community as a whole is more divided, with a range of opinions on what a good execution
policy is. For now, we’ll go with Microsoft’s recommendation and let you explore the
topic more on your own, if you wish.
 This would be a good time for us to discuss digital signing in depth.
NOTE Plenty of experts, including Microsoft’s own “Scripting Guy,” suggest
using the Unrestricted setting for ExecutionPolicy. Their feeling is that the
feature doesn’t provide a layer of security, and you shouldn’t give yourself
false confidence that it’s protecting you from anything.
17.3.2 Digital code signing
Digital code signing, code signing for short, is the process of applying a cryptographic
signature to a text file. Signatures appear at the end of the file and look something
like the following:
<!-- SIG # Begin signature block -->
<!-- MIIXXAYJKoZIhvcNAQcCoIIXTTCCF0kCAQExCzAJBgUrDgMCGgUAMGkGCisGAQQB -->
<!-- gjcCAQSgWzBZMDQGCisGAQQBgjcCAR4wJgIDAQAABBAfzDtgWUsITrck0sYpfvNR -->
<!-- AgEAAgEAAgEAAgEAAgEAMCEwCQYFKw4DAhoFAAQUJ7qroHx47PI1dIt4lBg6Y5Jo -->
<!-- UVigghIxMIIEYDCCA0ygAwIBAgIKLqsR3FD/XJ3LwDAJBgUrDgMCHQUAMHAxKzAp -->
<!-- YjcCn4FqI4n2XGOPsFq7OddgjFWEGjP1O5igggyiX4uzLLehpcur2iC2vzAZhSAU -->
<!-- DSq8UvRB4F4w45IoaYfBcOLzp6vOgEJydg4wggR6MIIDYqADAgECAgphBieBAAAA -->
<!-- ZngnZui2t++Fuc3uqv0SpAtZIikvz0DZVgQbdrVtZG1KVNvd8d6/n4PHgN9/TAI3 -->
<!-- an/xvmG4PNGSdjy8Dcbb5otiSjgByprAttPPf2EKUQrFPzREgZabAatwMKJbeRS4 -->
<!-- kd6Qy+RwkCn1UWIeaChbs0LJhix0jm38/pLCCOo1nL79E1sxJumCe6GtqjdWOIBn -->
<!-- KKe66D/GX7eGrfCVg2Vzgp4gG7fHADFEh3OcIvoILWc= -->
<!-- SIG # End signature block -->
Wait, what?
Did you notice that you could set the execution policy in a Group Policy object, but
also override it using a parameter of PowerShell.exe? What good is a GPO-controlled
setting that people can easily override? This emphasizes that the execution policy is
intended only to protect uninformed users from unintentionally running anonymous
scripts.
The execution policy isn’t intended to stop an informed user from doing anything
intentional. It’s not that kind of security setting.
In fact, the odds of someone using a PowerShell script to propagate malware aren’t
necessarily all that high. A smart malware coder would access the .NET Framework
functionality directly, without going to the trouble of using PowerShell as a middleman.


The signature contains two important pieces of information: First, it lists the identity
of the company or organization that signed the script. Second, it includes an
encrypted copy of the script, which PowerShell can decrypt. Understanding how this
works requires a bit of background information, which will also help you make some
important decisions about security in your environment.
 In order to create a digital signature, you need to have a code-signing certificate.
Also referred to as Class 3 certificates, these are available from commercial CAs like
Cybertrust, GoDaddy, Thawte, VeriSign, and others. You might also obtain one from
your company’s internal public-key infrastructure (PKI), if you have one. Class 3 certificates are normally issued only to organizations and companies, not to individuals,
although your company may issue them internally to specific users. Before issuing a
certificate, the CA is responsible for verifying the identity of the recipient—the certificate is a kind of digital identification card, listing the holder’s name and other details.
Before issuing a certificate to XYZ Corporation, for example, a CA needs to verify that
an authorized representative of XYZ Corporation is making the request. This verification process is the single most important step in the entire security framework, and
you should only trust a CA that you know does a good job of verifying the identities of
the companies to which it issues certificates. If you’re not familiar with a CA’s verification procedures, you should not trust that CA.
 Trust is configured in Windows’ Internet Properties control panel (and can also
be configured by Group Policy). In that control panel, select the Content tab, and
then click Publishers. In the resulting dialog box, select the Trusted Root Certification Authorities tab. As shown in figure 17.3, you’ll see a list of the CAs that your computer trusts.
 When you trust a CA, you also trust all certificates issued by it. If someone uses a
certificate to sign a malicious script, you can use the signature itself to track down the
Figure 17.3 Configuring your
computer’s Trusted Root
Certification Authorities

author—that’s why signed scripts are considered more “trusted” than unsigned
scripts. But if you place your trust in a CA that does a bad job of verifying identities, a
malicious script author might be able to obtain a fraudulent certificate, and you
wouldn’t be able to use their signature to track them down. That’s why choosing
which CAs to trust is such a big responsibility.
 Once you’ve obtained a Class 3 certificate (specifically, you need one packaged as
an Authenticode certificate—CAs usually offer different varieties for different operating systems and programming languages), you install it on your computer. Once
installed, you can then use PowerShell’s Set-AuthenticodeSignature cmdlet to apply
a digital signature to a script. Run help about_signing in the shell to learn more.
Many commercial script development environments (PrimalScript, PowerShell Plus,
PowerGUI, and others) can also apply signatures, and can even do that automatically
when you save a script, making the signing process more transparent for you.
 Signatures not only provide information about the script author’s identity, they
also ensure that the script hasn’t been modified since the author signed it. It works as
follows:
1 The script author holds a digital certificate, which consists of two cryptographic
keys: a public key and a private key.
2 When signing a script, the signature is encrypted using the private key. Only the
script author has access to that key, and only the public key can decrypt the signature. The signature contains a copy of the script.
3 When PowerShell runs the script, it uses the author’s public key (which is
included along with the signature) to decrypt the signature. If the decryption
fails, the signature was tampered with, and the script won’t run. If the copy of
the script within the signature doesn’t match the clear-text copy, the signature is
considered broken, and the script won’t run.
Figure 17.4 illustrates the entire process that PowerShell goes through when trying to
run a script. You can see how the AllSigned execution policy is somewhat more
secure: under that setting, only scripts containing a signature will execute, meaning
that you’ll always be able to identify a script’s author. You’ll also have to sign every
script you want to run, and resign them any time you change them, which can be
inconvenient.
17.4 Other security measures
PowerShell has two other key security measures that are in effect at all times, and they
shouldn’t be modified.
 First, Windows doesn’t consider the .PS1 filename extension (which is what the
shell uses to identify PowerShell scripts) an executable file type. Double-clicking a .PS1
file will normally open it in Notepad for editing, rather than execute it. This configuration is intended to help prevent users from unknowingly executing a script, even if
the execution policy would allow it.

Second, you can’t run a script within the shell by typing its name. The shell never
searches the current directory for scripts, which means if you have a script named
test.ps1, changing to its folder and typing test or test.ps1 won’t run the script.
 Here’s an example:
PS C:\> test
The term 'test' is not recognized as the name of a cmdlet, function, scrip
t file, or operable program. Check the spelling of the name, or if a path
was included, verify that the path is correct and try again.
At line:1 char:5
+ test <<<<
User tries
to script
What is the
execution
policy?
Run script Do Not
Run script Unrestricted Restricted
Is the script
local?
Is the script
signed?
Remote
signed
All
signed
No
Is the signature
intact
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes No
Yes
Is script
unmodified?
Is cerficate
from trusted CA?
Figure 17.4 The process PowerShell follows when attempting to execute a script

 + CategoryInfo : ObjectNotFound: (test:String) [], CommandNo
 tFoundException
 + FullyQualifiedErrorId : CommandNotFoundException
Suggestion [3,General]: The command test was not found, but does exist in t
he current location. Windows PowerShell doesn't load commands from the curr
ent location by default. If you trust this command, instead type ".\test".
See "get-help about_Command_Precedence" for more details.
PS C:\>
As you can see in the previous example, PowerShell does detect the script but warns
you that you have to type either an absolute or relative path in order to run the script.
Because the script is located in C:, you could run either C:\test, which is an absolute
path, or run .\test, which is a relative path that points to the current folder.
 The purpose of this security feature is to guard against a type of attack called command hijacking. The attack involves putting a script into a folder, and giving it the
same name as a built-in command, such as Dir. With PowerShell, you never put a path
in front of a command name—if you run Dir, you know you’re running the command; if you run .\Dir, you know you’re running a script named Dir.ps1.
17.5 Other security holes?
As we discussed earlier in this chapter, PowerShell’s security focuses primarily on preventing users from unknowingly running untrusted scripts. No security measures can
stop a user from manually typing commands into the shell, or from copying the entire
contents of a script and pasting them into the shell (although the commands might
not have the same effect when run in that fashion). It’s a little more difficult to convince a user to do that, and to explain to them how to do it, which is why Microsoft
didn’t focus on that scenario as a potential attack vector. But remember, PowerShell
doesn’t grant your users any additional permissions—they’ll only be able to do those
things that you’ve permitted them to do.
 Someone could call a user on the phone, or send an email, and walk them through
the process of opening PowerShell, typing a few commands, and damaging their computer. But that same someone could also talk a user through an attack using something other than PowerShell. It’d be as easy (or difficult, depending on your
viewpoint) to convince a user to open Explorer, select the Program Files folder, and
hit Delete on the keyboard. In some ways, that would be easier than walking a user
through the equivalent PowerShell command.
 We point this out only because people tend to get nervous about the command
line and its seemingly infinite reach and power, but the fact is that you and your users
can’t do anything with the shell that you couldn’t do in a half dozen other ways.
17.6 Security recommendations
As we mentioned earlier, Microsoft recommends the use of the RemoteSigned execution policy for computers where you need to run scripts. You can also consider using
AllSigned or even Unrestricted.

AllSigned is a bit less convenient, but you can make it more convenient by following these two recommendations:
 Commercial CAs charge up to $900 per year for a code-signing certificate. If you
don’t have an internal PKI that can provide a free one, you can make your own.
Run help about_signing for information on obtaining and using Makecert
.exe, a tool that will make a certificate that will be trusted only by your local
computer. If that’s the only place where you need to run scripts, it’s a quick and
free way to obtain a certificate.
 Edit scripts in one of the editors we mentioned, each of which can sign the
script for you each time you save the file. That makes the signing process transparent and automatic, making it more convenient.
As we’ve already stated, we don’t think you should change the .PS1 filename association. We’ve seen some folks modify Windows to recognize .PS1 as an executable,
meaning that you can double-click a script to run it. That takes us right back to the
bad old days of VBScript, and you probably want to avoid that.
 We want to point out that none of the scripts we supply on MoreLunches.com are
digitally signed. That means it’s possible for those to be modified without our (or
your) knowledge. Before you run any of those scripts, you should take the time to
review them, understand what they’re supposed to do, and make sure they match
what’s in this book (if appropriate). We didn’t sign the scripts specifically because we
want you to take that time: you should be in the habit of carefully reviewing anything you
download from the internet, no matter how “trusted” the author may seem.
17.7 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need any computer running PowerShell v3.
Your task in this lab is simple—so simple, in fact, that we won’t even post a sample solution on MoreLunches.com. We want you to configure your shell to allow script execution. Use the Set-ExecutionPolicy cmdlet, and we suggest using the RemoteSigned
policy setting. You’re welcome to use AllSigned, but it’ll be impractical for the purposes of this book’s remaining labs. You could also choose Unrestricted.
 That said, if you’re using PowerShell in a production environment, please make
sure that the execution policy setting you choose is compatible with your organization’s security rules and procedures. We don’t want you getting in trouble for the sake
of this book and its labs.
