
We’ve already mentioned that PowerShell contains a scripting language, and in a
few more chapters we’ll start to play with it. But once you start scripting, you tend
to start needing variables, so we’ll get those out of the way in this chapter. You can
use variables in a lot of places other than long, complex scripts, so we’ll also use this
chapter to show you some practical ways to use them.
18.1 Introduction to variables
A simple way to think of a variable is as a box in the computer’s memory that has
a name. You can put whatever you want into the box: a single computer name, a
collection of services, an XML document, and so on. You access the box by using
its name, and when accessing it, you can put things in it, add things to it, or
retrieve things from it. Those things stay in the box, allowing you to retrieve them
over and over.
 PowerShell doesn’t place a lot of formality around variables. For example, you
don’t have to explicitly announce or declare your intention to use a variable before
you do so. You can also change the types of the contents of a variable: one moment,
you might have a single process in it, and the next moment you can store a bunch
of computer names in it. A variable can even contain multiple different things,
such as a collection of services and a collection of processes (although we admit
that, in those cases, using the variable’s contents can be tricky).
Licensed to <pedbro@gmail.com>
Storing values in variables 223
18.2 Storing values in variables
Everything in PowerShell—and we do mean everything—is treated as an object. Even a
simple string of characters, such as a computer name, is considered an object. For
example, piping a string to Get-Member (or its alias, Gm) reveals that the object is of the
type System.String and that it has a great many methods you can work with (we’re
truncating the following list to save space):
PS C:\> "SERVER-R2" | gm
 TypeName: System.String
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
Clone Method System.Object Clone()
CompareTo Method int CompareTo(System.Object valu...
Contains Method bool Contains(string value)
CopyTo Method System.Void CopyTo(int sourceInd...
EndsWith Method bool EndsWith(string value), boo...
Equals Method bool Equals(System.Object obj), ...
GetEnumerator Method System.CharEnumerator GetEnumera...
GetHashCode Method int GetHashCode()
GetType Method type GetType()
GetTypeCode Method System.TypeCode GetTypeCode()
IndexOf Method int IndexOf(char value), int Ind...
IndexOfAny Method int IndexOfAny(char[] anyOf), in...
TRY IT NOW Run this same command in PowerShell to see if you get the complete list of methods—and even a property—that comes with a System
.String object.
Although that string is technically an object, like everything else in the shell, you’ll
find that folks tend to refer to it as a simple value. That’s because, in most cases, what
you’re concerned about is the string itself—"SERVER-R2" in the previous example—
and you’re less concerned about retrieving information from properties. That’s different from, say, a process, where the entire process object is a big, abstract data construct, and you’re usually dealing with individual properties such as VM, PM, Name, CPU,
ID, and so forth. A String is an object, but it’s a much less complicated object than
something like a Process.
 PowerShell allows you to store these simple values in a variable. To do this, specify
the variable, and use the equal sign operator—the assignment operator—followed by
whatever you want to put within the variable. Here’s an example:
PS C:\> $var = "SERVER-R2"
TRY IT NOW You’ll want to follow along with these examples, because then
you’ll be able to replicate the results we demonstrate. You should use your
test server’s name rather than SERVER-R2.
It’s important to note that the dollar sign ($) isn’t part of the variable’s name. In our
example, the variable name is var. The dollar sign is a cue to the shell that what follows
Licensed to <pedbro@gmail.com>
224 CHAPTER 18 Variables: a place to store your stuff
is going to be a variable name, and that we want to access the contents of that variable.
In this case, we’re setting the contents of the variable.
 Let’s look at some key points to keep in mind about variables and their names:
 Variable names usually contain letters, numbers, and underscores, and it’s most
common for them to begin with a letter or an underscore.
 Variable names can contain spaces, but the name must be enclosed in curly
braces. For example, ${My Variable} is how you represent a variable named
“My Variable”. Personally, we dislike variable names that contain spaces because
they require more typing and they’re harder to read.
 Variables don’t persist between shell sessions. When you close the shell, any
variables you created go away.
 Variable names can be quite long—long enough that you don’t need to worry
about how long. Try to make variable names sensible. For example, if you’ll be
putting a computer name into a variable, use computername as the variable
name. If a variable will contain a bunch of processes, then processes is a good
variable name.
 Except for folks who have a VBScript background, PowerShell users don’t typically use variable name prefixes to indicate what’s stored in the variable. For
example, in VBScript, strComputerName was a common type of variable name,
indicating that the variable stored a string (the “str” part). PowerShell doesn’t
care if you do that, but it’s no longer considered a desirable practice by the
community at large.
To retrieve the contents of a variable, use the dollar sign followed by the variable
name, as shown in the following example. Again, the dollar sign tells the shell you
want to access the contents of a variable; following it with the variable name tells the
shell which variable you’re accessing.
PS C:\> $var
SERVER-R2
You can use a variable in place of a value in almost any situation. For example, when
using WMI, you have the option to specify a computer name. The command might
normally look like this:
PS C:\> get-wmiobject win32_computersystem -comp SERVER-R2
Domain : company.pri
Manufacturer : VMware, Inc.
Model : VMware Virtual Platform
Name : SERVER-R2
PrimaryOwnerName : Windows User
TotalPhysicalMemory : 3220758528
You can substitute a variable for any of the values:

PS C:\> get-wmiobject win32_computersystem -comp $var
Domain : company.pri
Manufacturer : VMware, Inc.
Model : VMware Virtual Platform
Name : SERVER-R2
PrimaryOwnerName : Windows User
TotalPhysicalMemory : 3220758528
By the way, we realize that var is a pretty generic variable name. We’d normally use
computername, but in this specific instance we plan to reuse $var in several situations,
so we decided to keep it generic. Don’t let this example stop you from using more sensible variable names in real life.
 We may have put a string into $var to begin with, but we can change that anytime
we want:
PS C:\> $var = 5
PS C:\> $var | gm
 TypeName: System.Int32
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
CompareTo Method int CompareTo(System.Object value), int CompareT...
Equals Method bool Equals(System.Object obj), bool Equals(int ...
GetHashCode Method int GetHashCode()
GetType Method type GetType()
GetTypeCode Method System.TypeCode GetTypeCode()
ToString Method string ToString(), string ToString(string format...
In the preceding example, we placed an integer into $var, and then we piped $var to
Gm. You can see that the shell recognizes the contents of $var as a System.Int32, or a
32-bit integer.
18.3 Using variables: fun tricks with quotes
Because we’re talking about variables, this is a good time to cover a neat PowerShell
feature. To this point in the book, we’ve advised you to generally enclose strings
within single quotation marks. The reason for that is PowerShell treats everything
enclosed in single quotation marks as a literal string.
 Consider the following example:
PS C:\> $var = 'What does $var contain?'
PS C:\> $var
What does $var contain?
In the preceding example, you can see that the $var within single quotes is treated as
a literal.
 But in double quotation marks that’s not the case. Check out the following trick:
PS C:\> $computername = 'SERVER-R2'
PS C:\> $phrase = "The computer name is $computername"
PS C:\> $phrase
The computer name is SERVER-R2

We started our example by storing SERVER-R2 in the variable $computername. Next, we
stored "The computer name is $computername" in the variable $phrase. When we
did this, we used double quotes. PowerShell automatically seeks out dollar signs within
double quotes, and replaces any variables it finds with their contents. Because we displayed the contents of $phrase, $computername was replaced with SERVER-R2, the contents of the variable.
 This replacement action only happens when the shell initially parses the string. At
this point, $phrase contains "The computer name is SERVER-R2"—it doesn’t contain
the "$computername" string. We can test that by trying to change the contents of
$computername to see if $phrase updates itself:
PS C:\> $computername = 'SERVER1'
PS C:\> $phrase
The computer name is SERVER-R2
As you can see, the $phrase variable stayed the same.
 Another facet of this double-quotes trick is the PowerShell escape character. This
character is the backtick (`), and on a U.S. keyboard it’s located on one of the upperleft keys, usually below the Escape key and often on the same key as the tilde (~) character. The problem is that, in some fonts, it’s practically indistinguishable from a single quote. In fact, we usually configure our shell to use the Consolas font, because that
makes distinguishing the backtick easier than when using the Lucida Console or Raster fonts.
TRY IT NOW Click the control box in the upper-left corner of your PowerShell
window, and select Properties. On the Font tab, select the Consolas font as
shown in figure 18.1. Click OK, and type a single quote and a backtick so you
can see the difference between these characters. Figure 18.1 shows what it
looks like on our system. Can’t see the difference? We barely can, either, even
when using a large font size. It’s a tough distinction, but make sure you’re
comfortable distinguishing between these characters in whatever font face
and size you select.
Let’s look at what this escape character does. It removes whatever special meaning
might be associated with the character after it, or in some cases, it adds special meaning to the following character. We have an example of this first use:
PS C:\> $computername = 'SERVER-R2'
PS C:\> $phrase = "`$computername contains $computername"
PS C:\> $phrase
$computername contains SERVER-R2
When we assigned the string to $phrase, we used $computername twice. The first time,
we preceded the dollar sign with a backtick. Doing this took away the dollar sign’s special meaning as a variable indicator and made it a literal dollar sign. You can see in the
preceding output, on the last line, that $computername was stored in the variable. We
didn’t use the backtick the second time, so $computername was replaced with the contents of that variable.

Now, let’s look at an example of the second way a backtick can work:
PS C:\> $phrase = "`$computername`ncontains`n$computername"
PS C:\> $phrase
$computername
contains
SERVER-R2
Look carefully, and you’ll notice we used `n twice in the phrase—once after the first
$computername and once after contains. In the example, the backtick is adding a special meaning. Normally, “n” is a letter, but with the backtick in front of it, it becomes a
carriage return and line feed (think “n” for “new line”).
 Run help about_escape for more information, including a list of other special
escape characters. You can, for example, use an escaped “t” to insert a tab, or an
escaped “a” to make your computer beep (think “a” for “alert”).
18.4 Storing many objects in a variable
To this point, we’ve been working with variables that contain a single object, and those
objects have all been simple values. We’ve worked directly with the objects themselves,
rather than with their properties or methods. Let’s now try putting a bunch of objects
into a single variable.
Figure 18.1 Setting a font that makes it easier to distinguish the backtick
character from the single quote


 One way to do this is to use a comma-separated list, because PowerShell recognizes
those lists as collections of objects:
PS C:\> $computers = 'SERVER-R2','SERVER1','localhost'
PS C:\> $computers
SERVER-R2
SERVER1
Localhost
Notice that we were careful in the previous example to put the commas outside the
quotation marks. If we’d put them inside, we’d have had a single object that included
commas and three computer names. With our method, we get three distinct objects,
all of which are String types. As you can see, when we examined the contents of the
variable, PowerShell displayed each object on its own line.
18.4.1 Working with single objects in a variable
You can also access individual elements in the variable, one at a time. To do this, specify an index number for the object you want, in square brackets. The first object is
always at index number 0, the second is at index number 1, and so forth. You can also
use an index of -1 to access the last object, -2 for the next-to-last object, and so on.
Here’s an example:
PS C:\> $computers[0]
SERVER-R2
PS C:\> $computers[1]
SERVER1
PS C:\> $computers[-1]
localhost
PS C:\> $computers[-2]
SERVER1
The variable itself has a property that lets you see how many objects are in it:
PS C:\> $computers.count
3
You can also access the properties and methods of the objects inside the variable as if
they were properties and methods of the variable itself. This is a bit easier to see, at
first, with a variable that contains a single object:
PS C:\> $computername.length
9
PS C:\> $computername.toupper()
SERVER-R2
PS C:\> $computername.tolower()
server-r2
PS C:\> $computername.replace('R2','2008')
SERVER-2008
PS C:\> $computername
SERVER-R2


In the previous example, we’re using the $computername variable we created earlier in
the chapter. If you remember, that variable contained an object of the type System
.String, and you should have seen the complete list of properties and methods of
that type when you piped a string to Gm in section 18.2. We’ve used the Length property, as well as the ToUpper(), ToLower(), and Replace() methods. In each case, we
had to follow the method name with parentheses, even though neither ToUpper() nor
ToLower() require any parameters inside those parentheses. Also, none of these
methods changed what was in the variable—you can see that on the last line. Instead,
each method created a new String based on the original one, as modified by the
method.
18.4.2 Working with multiple objects in a variable
When a variable contains multiple objects, the steps can get a bit trickier. Even if every
object inside the variable is of the same type, as is the case with our $computers variable, PowerShell v2 didn’t let you call a method, or access a property, on multiple objects at
the same time. If you tried to do so, you got an error:
PS C:\> $computers.toupper()
Method invocation failed because [System.Object[]] doesn't contain a metho
d named 'toupper'.
At line:1 char:19
+ $computers.toupper <<<< ()
 + CategoryInfo : InvalidOperation: (toupper:String) [], Runt
 imeException
 + FullyQualifiedErrorId : MethodNotFound
Instead, you would have to specify which object within the variable you want, and then
access a property or execute a method on that specific object:
PS C:\> $computers[0].tolower()
server-r2
PS C:\> $computers[1].replace('SERVER','CLIENT')
CLIENT1
Again, these methods are producing new strings, not changing the ones inside the
variable. You can test that by examining the contents of the variable:
PS C:\> $computers
SERVER-R2
SERVER1
Localhost
What if you want to change the contents of the variable? You’d assign a new value to
one of the existing objects:
PS C:\> $computers[1] = $computers[1].replace('SERVER','CLIENT')
PS C:\> $computers
SERVER-R2
CLIENT1
Localhost
You can see in this example that we changed the second object in the variable, rather
than producing a new string. We point this out in case you’re dealing with computers
that only have PowerShell v2 installed; the behavior has changed a bit for v3, as we’ll
see in a bit.
18.4.3 Other ways to work with multiple objects
We want to show you two other options for working with the properties and methods
of a bunch of objects contained in a variable. The previous examples only executed
methods on a single object within the variable. If you wanted to run the ToLower()
method on every object within the variable, and store the results back into the variable, you’d do something like this:
PS C:\> $computers = $computers | ForEach-Object { $_.ToLower() }
PS C:\> $computers
server-r2
client1
localhost
This example is a bit complicated, so let’s break it down in figure 18.2. We started the
pipeline with $computers =, which means the results of the pipeline will be stored in
that variable. Those results will overwrite whatever was in the variable previously.
 The pipeline begins with $computers being piped to ForEach-Object. The cmdlet
will enumerate each object in the pipeline (we have three computer names, which are
String objects), and execute its script block for each. Within the script block, the $_
placeholder will contain one piped-in object at a time, and we’re executing the
ToLower() method of each object. The new String objects produced by ToLower()
will be placed into the pipeline—and into the $computers variable.
 You can do something similar with properties by using Select-Object. This example will select the Length property of each object you pipe to the cmdlet:
PS C:\> $computers | select-object length
 Length
 ------
 9
 7
 9
Because the property is numeric, PowerShell right-aligns the output.
Figure 18.2
Using ForEach-Object to
execute a method against
each object contained within
a variable

18.4.4 Unrolling Properties and Methods in PowerShell v3
All this business of “you can’t access properties and methods when a variable contains
multiple objects” proved to be extremely confusing for users of PowerShell v1 and v2.
So confusing that, for v3, Microsoft made an important change, called automatic unrolling. Essentially, it means you now can access properties and methods using a variable
that contains multiple objects:
$services = Get-Service
$services.Name
Under the hood, PowerShell “sees” that you’re trying to access a property, in that
example. It also sees that the collection in $services doesn’t have a Name property –
but that the individual objects within the collection do. So it implicitly enumerates, or
unrolls, the objects, and grabs the Name property of each. This is equivalent to:
Get-Service | ForEach-Object { Write-Output $_.Name }
And also equivalent to:
Get-Service | Select-Object –ExpandProperty Name
Which are the two ways you’d have had to do this in v1 and v2. The same thing works
for methods:
$objects = Get-WmiObject –class Win32_Service –filter "name='BITS'"
$objects.ChangeStartMode('Disabled')
Just bear in mind that this is a PowerShell v3 feature – don’t expect it to work this way
on older versions of PowerShell.
18.5 More tricks with double quotes
We have another cool technique you can use with double quotes, which is a somewhat
conceptual extension of the variable-replacement trick. Suppose, for example, that
you’ve put a bunch of services into the $service variable. Now, you want to put only
the name of the first one into a string:
PS C:\> $services = get-service
PS C:\> $firstname = "$services[0].name"
PS C:\> $firstname
AeLookupSvc ALG AllUserInstallAgent AppIDSvc Appinfo AppMgmt AudioEndpoint
Builder Audiosrv AxInstSV BDESVC BFE BITS BrokerInfrastructure Browser bth
serv CertPropSvc COMSysApp CryptSvc CscService DcomLaunch defragsvc Device
AssociationService DeviceInstall Dhcp Dnscache dot3svc DPS DsmSvc Eaphost
EFS ehRecvr ehSched EventLog EventSystem Fax fdPHost FDResPub fhsvc FontCa
che gpsvc hidserv hkmsvc HomeGroupListener HomeGroupProvider IKEEXT iphlps
vc KeyIso KtmRm LanmanServer LanmanWorkstation lltdsvc lmhosts LSM Mcx2Svc
 MMCSS MpsSvc MSDTC MSiSCSI msiserver napagent NcaSvc NcdAutoSetup Netlogo
n Netman netprofm NetTcpPortSharing NlaSvc nsi p2pimsvc p2psvc Parallels C
oherence Service Parallels Tools Service PcaSvc PeerDistSvc PerfHost pla P
lugPlay PNRPAutoReg PNRPsvc PolicyAgent Power PrintNotify ProfSvc QWAVE Ra
sAuto RasMan RemoteAccess RemoteRegistry RpcEptMapper RpcLocator RpcSs Sam
Ss SCardSvr Schedule SCPolicySvc SDRSVC seclogon SENS SensrSvc SessionEnv

SharedAccess ShellHWDetection SNMPTRAP Spooler sppsvc SSDPSRV SstpSvc stis
vc StorSvc svsvc swprv SysMain SystemEventsBroker TabletInputService TapiS
rv TermService Themes THREADORDER TimeBroker TrkWks TrustedInstaller UI0De
tect UmRdpService upnphost VaultSvc vds vmicheartbeat vmickvpexchange vmic
rdv vmicshutdown vmictimesync vmicvss VSS W32Time wbengine WbioSrvc Wcmsvc
 wcncsvc WcsPlugInService WdiServiceHost WdiSystemHost WdNisSvc WebClient
Wecsvc wercplsupport WerSvc WiaRpc WinDefend WinHttpAutoProxySvc Winmgmt W
inRM WlanSvc wlidsvc wmiApSrv WMPNetworkSvc WPCSvc WPDBusEnum wscsvc WSear
ch WSService wuauserv wudfsvc WwanSvc[0].name
Err, oops. The [ immediately after $services in the example isn’t normally a legal
character in a variable name, which caused PowerShell to try and replace $services.
Doing this jammed the name of every service into your string. The [0].name part
wasn’t replaced at all.
 The solution is to put all of that into an expression:
PS C:\> $services = get-service
PS C:\> $firstname = "The first name is $($services[0].name)"
PS C:\> $firstname
The first name is AeLookupSvc
Everything within $() is evaluated as a normal PowerShell command, and the result is
placed into the string, replacing anything that was already there. Again, this only
works in double quotes. This $() construct is called a subexpression.
 We have another cool trick you can do in PowerShell v3. Sometimes, you’ll want to
put something more complicated into a variable, and then display that variable’s contents within quotation marks. In PowerShell v3, the shell is smart enough to enumerate all of the objects in a collection even when you refer to a single property or
method, provided that all of the objects in the collection are of the same type. For
example, we’ll retrieve a list of services and put them into the $service variable, and
then include only the services’ names in double quotes:
PS C:\> $services = get-service
PS C:\> $var = "Service names are $services.name"
PS C:\> $var
Service names are AeLookupSvc ALG AllUserInstallAgent AppIDSvc Appinfo App
Mgmt AudioEndpointBuilder Audiosrv AxInstSV BDESVC BFE BITS BrokerInfrastr
ucture Browser bthserv CertPropSvc COMSysApp CryptSvc CscService DcomLaunc
h defragsvc DeviceAssociationService DeviceInstall Dhcp Dnscache dot3svc D
PS DsmSvc Eaphost EFS ehRecvr ehSched EventLog EventSystem Fax fdPHost FDR
esPub fhsvc FontCache FontCache3.0.0.0 gpsvc hidserv hkmsvc HomeGroupListe
ner HomeGroupProvider IKEEXT iphlpsvc KeyIso KtmRm LanmanServer LanmanWork
station lltdsvc lmhosts LSM Mcx2Svc MMCSS MpsSvc MSDTC MSiSCSI msiserver M
SSQL$SQLEXPRESS napagent NcaSvc NcdAutoSetup Netlogon Netman netprofm NetT
cpPortSharing NlaSvc nsi p2pimsvc p2psvc Parallels Coherence Service Paral
lels Tools Service PcaSvc PeerDistSvc PerfHost pla PlugPlay PNRPAutoReg PN
RPsvc PolicyAgent Power PrintNotify ProfSvc QWAVE RasAuto RasMan RemoteAcc
ess RemoteRegistry RpcEptMapper RpcLocator RpcSs SamSs SCardSvr Schedule S
CPolicySvc SDRSVC seclogon SENS SensrSvc SessionEnv SharedAccess ShellHWDe
We truncated the preceding output a bit to save some space, but we hope you get the
idea. Obviously, this might not be the exact output you’re looking for, but between

this technique and the subexpressions technique we showed you earlier in this section, you should be able to get exactly what you want.
18.6 Declaring a variable’s type
So far we’ve only put objects into variables and let PowerShell figure out what types of
objects we were using. The fact is that PowerShell doesn’t care what kind of objects
you put into the box. But you might care.
 For example, suppose you have a variable that you expect to contain a number.
You plan to do some arithmetic with that number, and you ask a user to input that
number. Let’s look at an example, which you can type directly into the command line:
PS C:\> $number = Read-Host "Enter a number"
Enter a number: 100
PS C:\> $number = $number * 10
PS C:\> $number
100100100100100100100100100100
TRY IT NOW We haven’t showed you Read-Host yet—we’re saving it for the
next chapter—but its operation should be obvious if you follow along with
this example.
What the heck? How can 100 multiplied by 10 be 100100100100100100100100100100?
What crazy new math is that?
 If you’re sharp-eyed, you may have spotted what’s happening. PowerShell didn’t
treat our input as a number; it treated it as a string. Instead of multiplying 100 by 10,
PowerShell duplicated the string “100” ten times. The result then is the string 100, listed
ten times in a row. Oops.
 We can verify that the shell is in fact treating the input as a string:
PS C:\> $number = Read-Host "Enter a number"
Enter a number: 100
PS C:\> $number | gm
 TypeName: System.String
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
Clone Method System.Object Clone()
CompareTo Method int CompareTo(System.Object valu...
Contains Method bool Contains(string value)
Yep, piping $number to Gm confirms that the shell sees it as a System.String, not a
System.Int32. There are a couple of ways you could choose to deal with this problem,
and we’ll show you the easiest one.
 First, we’ll tell the shell that the $number variable should contain an integer, which
will force the shell to try to convert any input to a real number. We do that in the following example by specifying the desired data type, int, in square brackets immediately prior to the variable’s first use:

PS C:\> [int]$number = Read-Host "Enter a number"
Enter a number: 100
PS C:\> $number | gm
 TypeName: System.Int32
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
CompareTo Method int CompareTo(System.Object value), int CompareT...
Equals Method bool Equals(System.Object obj), bool Equals(int ...
GetHashCode Method int GetHashCode()
GetType Method type GetType()
GetTypeCode Method System.TypeCode GetTypeCode()
ToString Method string ToString(), string ToString(string format...
PS C:\> $number = $number * 10
PS C:\> $number
1000
In the previous example, we used [int] to force $number to contain only integers B.
After entering our input, we piped $number to Gm to confirm that it’s indeed an integer, and not a string C. At the end, you can see that the variable was treated as a number and real multiplication took place D.
 Another benefit to using this technique is that the shell will throw an error if it can’t
convert the input into a number, because $number is only capable of storing integers:
PS C:\> [int]$number = Read-Host "Enter a number"
Enter a number: Hello
Cannot convert value "Hello" to type "System.Int32". Error: "Input string
was not in a correct format."
At line:1 char:13
+ [int]$number <<<< = Read-Host "Enter a number"
 + CategoryInfo : MetadataError: (:) [], ArgumentTransformati
 onMetadataException
 + FullyQualifiedErrorId : RuntimeException
This is a great example of how to prevent problems later on down the line, because
you’re assured that $number will contain the exact type of data you expect it to.
 You can use many different object types in place of [int], but the following list
includes some of the ones you’ll most commonly use:
 [int]—Integer numbers
 [single] and [double]—Single-precision and double-precision floating numbers (numbers with a decimal portion)
 [string]—A string of characters
 [char]—Exactly one character (as in, [char]$c = 'X')
 [xml]—An XML document; whatever string you assign to this will be parsed to
make sure it contains valid XML markup (for example, [xml]$doc = Get-Content
MyXML.xml)
 [adsi]—An Active Directory Service Interfaces (ADSI) query; the shell will execute the query and place the resulting object or objects into the variable (such
as [adsi]$user = "WinNT:\\MYDOMAIN\Administrator,user")
Force variable
B to [int]
Confirm that
C variable is Int32
Variable was
treated as number
D

Specifying an object type for a variable is a great way to prevent certain tricky logic
errors in more complex scripts. As the following example shows, once you specify the
object type, PowerShell enforces it until you explicitly retype the variable:
PS C:\> [int]$x = 5
PS C:\> $x = 'Hello'
Cannot convert value "Hello" to type "System.Int32". Error: "Input string
was not in a correct format."
At line:1 char:3
+ $x <<<< = 'Hello'
 + CategoryInfo : MetadataError: (:) [], ArgumentTransformati
 onMetadataException
 + FullyQualifiedErrorId : RuntimeException
PS C:\> [string]$x = 'Hello'
PS C:\> $x | gm
 TypeName: System.String
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
Clone Method System.Object Clone()
CompareTo Method int CompareTo(System.Object valu...
In the previous example, you can see that we started by declaring $x as an integer B,
and placing an integer into it. When we tried to put a string into it C, PowerShell
threw an error because it couldn’t convert that particular string into a number. Later
we retyped $x as a string, and we were able to put a string into it D. We confirmed
that by piping the variable to Gm and checking its type name E.
18.7 Commands for working with variables
We’ve started to use variables at this point, without formally declaring our intention to
do so. PowerShell doesn’t require advanced variable declaration, and you can’t force
it to make a declaration. (VBScript folks who are looking for something like Option
Explicit will be disappointed; PowerShell has something called Set-StrictMode, but
it isn’t exactly the same thing.) But the shell does include the following commands for
working with variables:
 New-Variable
 Set-Variable
 Remove-Variable
 Get-Variable
 Clear-Variable
You don’t need to use any of these except perhaps for Remove-Variable, which is useful for permanently deleting a variable (you can also use the Del command within the
VARIABLE: drive to delete a variable). You can perform every other function—creating
new variables, reading variables, and setting variables—using the ad hoc syntax we’ve
used up to this point in the chapter; using these cmdlets offers no specific advantages
in most cases.
B Declares $x as integer
C
Creates
error by
putting
string
into $x
Retypes $x
as string
D
Confirms new
type of $x
E

 If you do decide to use these cmdlets, you’ll give your variable name to the
cmdlets’ -name parameters. This is only the variable name—it doesn’t include the dollar
sign. The one time you might want to use one of these cmdlets is if you’re working
with something called an out-of-scope variable. Messing with out-of-scope variables is a
poor practice, and we won’t cover out-of-scope variables (or much more on scope) in
this book, but you can run help about_scope in the shell to learn more.
18.8 Variable best practices
We’ve mentioned most of these practices already, but this is a good time to quickly
review them:
 Keep variable names meaningful, but succinct. Whereas $computername is a
great variable name because it’s clear and concise, $c is a poor name, because
what it contains isn’t clear. The variable name $computer_to_query_for_data
is a bit long for our tastes. Sure, it’s meaningful, but do you want to type that
over and over?
 Don’t use spaces in variable names. We know you can, but it’s ugly syntax.
 If a variable will only contain one kind of object, then declare that when you
first use the variable. This can help prevent some confusing logic errors, and if
you’re working in a commercial script development environment (PrimalScript
is the example we’re thinking of), the editor software can provide code-hinting
features when you tell it what type of object a variable will contain.
18.9 Common points of confusion
The biggest single point of confusion we see new students struggle with is the variable
name. We hope we’ve done a good job of explaining it in this chapter, but always
remember that the dollar sign isn’t part of the variable’s name. It’s a cue to the shell that
you want to access the contents of a variable; what follows the dollar sign is taken as the
variable’s name.
 The shell has two parsing rules that let it capture the variable name:
 If the character immediately after the dollar sign is a letter, number, or underscore, the variable name consists of all the characters following the dollar sign,
up to the next white space (which might be a space, tab, or carriage return).
 If the character immediately after the dollar sign is an opening curly brace, {,
the variable name consists of everything after that curly brace up to, but not
including, the closing curly brace, }.

18.10 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need any computer running PowerShell v3.
Flip back to chapter 15 and refresh your memory on working with background jobs.
Then, at the command line, do the following:
Licensed to <pedbro@gmail.com>
Further exploration 237
1 Create a background job that queries the Win32_BIOS information from two
computers (use “localhost” twice if you only have one computer to experiment with).

PS C:\> invoke-commad {get-wniobject win32_bios) -computername
localhost,$env:computername -asjob

}
2 When the job finishes running, receive the results of the job into a variable.

PS C:\>$results=Receive-Job 4 -keep

3 Display the contents of that variable.
PS C:\>$results


4 Export the variable’s contents to a CliXML file.

PS C:\>$results | export-clixml bios.xml


18.11 Further exploration
Take a few moments and skim through some of the previous chapters in this book.
Given that variables are primarily designed to store something you might use more
than once, can you find a use for variables in our topics in previous chapters?
 For example, in chapter 13 you learned to create connections to remote computers. What you did in that chapter was create, use, and close a connection more or less
in one step; wouldn’t it be useful to create the connection, store it in a variable, and
use it for several commands? That’s only one instance of where variables can come in
handy (and we’re going to show you how to do that in chapter 20). See if you can find
any more examples.
