To this point in the book, we’ve primarily been relying on PowerShell’s native ability to output tables and lists. As you start to combine commands into more complex
scripts, you’ll probably want to gain more precise control over what’s displayed. You
may also need to prompt a user for input. In this chapter, you’ll learn how to collect that input, and how to display whatever output you might desire.
19.1 Prompting for, and displaying, information
How PowerShell displays and prompts for information depends on how it’s being
run. You see, PowerShell is built as a kind of under-the-hood engine.
 What you interact with is called a host application. The command-line console
you see when running PowerShell.exe is often called the console host. The graphical
PowerShell ISE is usually called the ISE host or the graphical host. Other nonMicrosoft applications can host the shell’s engine as well. You interact with the hosting application, and it passes your commands through to the engine. The hosting
application displays the results that the engine produces.
 Figure 19.1 illustrates the relationship between the engine and the various hosting applications. Each hosting application is responsible for physically displaying
any output the engine produces, and for physically collecting any input the engine
requests. That means PowerShell can display output and collect input in different
ways. In fact, the console host and ISE use different methods for collecting input:
the console host presents a text prompt within the command line, but the ISE produces a pop-up dialog box with a text entry area and an OK button.


We want to point out these differences because it can sometimes be confusing to newcomers. Why would one command behave one way in the command-line window but
behave completely differently in the ISE? It’s because the way in which you interact
with the shell is determined by the hosting application, and not by PowerShell itself.
The commands we’re about to show you exhibit slightly different behavior depending
on where you run them.
19.2 Read-Host
PowerShell’s Read-Host cmdlet is designed to display a text prompt and then collect
text input from the user. Because you saw us use this for the first time in the previous
chapter, the syntax may seem familiar:
PS C:\> read-host "Enter a computer name"
Enter a computer name: SERVER-R2
SERVER-R2
This example highlights two important facts about the cmdlet:
 A colon is added to the end of the prompt.
 Whatever the user types is returned as the result of the command (technically,
it’s placed into the pipeline).
You’ll often capture the input into a variable, which looks like this:
PS C:\> $computername = read-host "Enter a computer name"
Enter a computer name: SERVER-R2
TRY IT NOW Time to start following along. At this point, you should have a
valid computer name in the $computername variable. Don’t use SERVER-R2
unless that’s the name of the computer you’re working on.
As we mentioned earlier, the PowerShell v2 ISE will display a dialog box, rather than
prompting directly within the command line, as shown in figure 19.2. Other hosting
applications, including script editors like PowerGUI, PowerShell Plus, or PrimalScript,
each have their own way of implementing Read-Host. Note that the PowerShell v3 ISE,
which uses a simpler two-pane layout than the v2 ISE, will display a command-line
prompt much like the regular console window.
Console
Host
ISE Other
PowerShell
engine
Figure 19.1 Various applications are
capable of hosting the PowerShell engine.

There isn’t much else to say about Read-Host: it’s a useful cmdlet, but not a particularly
exciting one. In fact, after introducing Read-Host in most classes, someone will typically
ask us, “Is there a way to always display a graphical input box?” Many administrators
want to deploy scripts to their users, and they don’t want users to have to enter information into a command-line interface (it isn’t “Windows-like,” after all). The answer we
give is “yes,” but it isn’t straightforward. The final result is shown in figure 19.3.
 To create the graphical input box, you’ll have to dive into the .NET Framework
itself. Start with the following command:
PS C:\> [void][System.Reflection.Assembly]::LoadWithPartialName('Microsoft
➥.VisualBasic')
Figure 19.2 The v2 ISE displays a dialog box for Read-Host.
Figure 19.3 Creating a
graphical input box in
Windows PowerShell

You only have to do this once in a given shell session, but it doesn’t hurt to run the
command a second time.
 This command loads a portion of the .NET Framework, Microsoft.VisualBasic,
which PowerShell doesn’t automatically load. This portion of the framework contains
most of the Visual Basic–centric framework elements, including things like graphical
input boxes.
 Let’s look at what the command is doing:
 The [void] part is converting the result of the command into the void data
type. You learned how to do this kind of conversion with integers in the previous
chapter; the void data type is a special type that means “throw the result away.”
We don’t want to see the result of this command, so we convert the result to
void. Another way to do the same thing would be to pipe the result to Out-Null.
 Next, we’re accessing the System.Reflection.Assembly type, which represents
our application (which is PowerShell). We’ve enclosed the type name in square
brackets, as if we were declaring a variable to be of that type. But rather than
declaring a variable, we’re using two colons to access a static method of the type.
Static methods exist without us having to create an instance of the type.
 The static method we’re using is LoadWithPartialName(), which accepts the
name of the framework component we want to load.
If all of that is as clear as mud, don’t worry; you can use the command as is, without
needing to understand how it works. Once the right bits of the framework are loaded,
you can use them as follows:
PS C:\> $computername = [Microsoft.VisualBasic.Interaction]::InputBox('Ente
➥r a computer name','Computer Name','localhost')
In this example, we’ve used a static method again, this time from the Microsoft
.VisualBasic.Interaction type, which we loaded into memory with the previous
command. Again, if the “static method” stuff doesn’t make sense, don’t worry—use
this command as is.
 The three bits you can change are the parameters of the InputBox() method:
 The first parameter is the text for your prompt.
 The second parameter is the title for the prompt’s dialog box.
 The third parameter, which can be left blank or omitted entirely, is the default
value that you want prefilled in the input box.
Using Read-Host may be less complicated than following the steps in the previous
example, but if you insist on a dialog box, this is how you create one.
19.3 Write-Host
Now that you can collect input, you’ll want some way of displaying output. The
Write-Host cmdlet is one way. It’s not always the best way, but it’s available to you, and
it’s important that you understand how it works.

As figure 19.4 illustrates, Write-Host runs in the pipeline like any other cmdlet, but it
doesn’t place anything into the pipeline. Instead, it writes directly to the hosting application’s screen. Because it does that, it’s able to use alternate foreground and background colors, through its -foregroundColor and -backgroundColor command-line
parameters.
PS C:\> write-host "COLORFUL!" -fore yellow -back magenta
COLORFUL!
TRY IT NOW You’ll want to run this command yourself to see the colorful
results.
NOTE Not every application that hosts PowerShell supports alternate text colors, and not every application supports the full set of colors. When you
attempt to set colors in such an application, it will usually ignore any colors it
doesn’t like or can’t display. That’s one reason we tend to avoid relying on
special colors at all.
You should use Write-Host only when you need to display a specific message, perhaps
using color to draw attention to it. But this isn’t the appropriate way to produce normal output from a script or a command.
 For example, you should never use Write-Host to manually format a table—you
can find better ways to produce the output, using techniques that enable PowerShell
itself to handle the formatting. We won’t dive into those techniques in this book,
because they belong more in the realm of heavy-duty scripting and toolmaking. However, you can check out Learn PowerShell Toolmaking in a Month of Lunches (Manning,
2012) for full coverage of those output techniques. Write-Host is also not the best way
to produce error messages, warnings, debugging messages, and so on—again, you can
find more specific ways to do those things, and we’ll cover those in this chapter. You
probably won’t use Write-Host much, if you’re using the shell correctly.
NOTE We often see people using Write-Host to display what we call “warm
and fuzzy” messages—things like “now connecting to SERVER2,” “testing for
folder,” and so on. Don’t. The more appropriate way to display those messages is Write-Verbose.

The pipeline
Hosng applicaon
Write-Host "Hello" Out-Default
Out-Host
Hello Figure 19.4 Write-Host
bypasses the pipeline and
writes directly to the hosting
application’s display.

19.4 Write-Output
Unlike Write-Host, Write-Output can send objects into the pipeline. Because it isn’t
writing directly to the display, it doesn’t permit you to specify alternative colors or anything. In fact, Write-Output (or its alias, Write) isn’t technically designed to display
output at all. As we said, it sends objects into the pipeline—it’s the pipeline itself that
eventually displays those objects. Figure 19.5 illustrates how this works.
 Refer back to chapter 10 for a quick review of how objects go from the pipeline to
the screen. Let’s look at the basic process:
1 Write-Output puts the String object Hello into the pipeline.
2 Because nothing else is in the pipeline, Hello travels to the end of the pipeline,
where Out-Default always sits.
3 Out-Default passes the object to Out-Host.
Above and beyond
We’ll dive into Write-Verbose and the other Write cmdlets a bit more in chapter
22. But if you try Write-Verbose now, you might be disappointed to discover that it
doesn’t produce any output. Well, not by default.
If you plan to use Write cmdlets, the trick is to turn them on first. For
example, set $VerbosePreference="Continue" to enable Write-Verbose, and
$VerbosePreference="SilentlyContinue" to suppress its output. You’ll find
similar “preference” variables for Write-Debug ($DebugPreference) and
Write-Warning ($WarningPreference).
Chapter 22 will include an even cooler way to use Write-Verbose.
It may seem much easier to use Write-Host, and if you want to, you can. But keep
in mind that by using the other cmdlets, such as Write-Verbose, you’re going to be
following PowerShell’s own patterns more closely, resulting in a more consistent
experience.
Hosng applicaon
Hello
Out-Host
Write-Output "Hello" Out-Default
The pipeline
Figure 19.5 Write-Output puts
objects into the pipeline, which in
some cases, eventually results in
those objects being displayed.

4 Out-Host asks PowerShell’s formatting system to format the object. Because in
this example it’s a simple String, the formatting system returns the text of the
string.
5 Out-Host places the formatted result onto the screen.
The results are similar to what you’d get using Write-Host, but the object took a different path to get there. That path is important, because the pipeline could contain
other things. For example, consider the following command (which you’re welcome
to try):
PS C:\> write-output "Hello" | where-object { $_.length -gt 10 }
You don’t see any output from this command, and figure 19.6 illustrates why. Hello
was placed into the pipeline. But before it got to Out-Default, it had to pass through
Where-Object, which filtered out anything having a Length property of less than or
equal to 10, which in this case included our poor Hello. Our Hello got dropped out
of the pipeline, and because there was nothing left in the pipeline for Out-Default,
there was nothing to pass to Out-Host, so nothing was displayed.
 Contrast that command with the following one:
PS C:\> write-host "Hello" | where-object { $_.length -gt 10 }
Hello
All we did was replace Write-Output with Write-Host. This time, Hello went directly
to the screen, not into the pipeline. Where-Object had no input, and produced no
output, so nothing was displayed by Out-Default and Out-Host. But because Hello
had been written directly to the screen, we saw it anyway.
Write-Output may seem new, but it turns out you’ve been using it all along. It’s the
shell’s default cmdlet. When you tell the shell to do something that isn’t a command,
the shell passes whatever you typed to Write-Output behind the scenes.
The pipeline
Hosng applicaon
Write-Output "Hello" Where-Object
{$_.Length -gt 10} Out-Default
Out-Host
Figure 19.6 Placing objects into the
pipeline means they can be filtered out
before they’re displayed.

19.5 Other ways to write
PowerShell has a few other ways to produce output. None of these write to the pipeline as Write-Output does; they work a bit more like Write-Host. But all of them produce output in a way that can be suppressed.
 The shell comes with built-in configuration variables for each of these alternative
output methods. When the configuration variable is set to Continue, the commands
we’re about to show you do indeed produce output. When the configuration variable
is set to SilentlyContinue, the associated output command produces nothing. Table
19.1 contains the list of cmdlets.
Write-Error works a bit differently because it writes an error to PowerShell’s error
stream.
 PowerShell also has a Write-Progress cmdlet that can display progress bars, but it
works entirely differently. Feel free to read its help for more information and for
examples; we won’t be covering it in this book.
 To use any of these cmdlets, first make sure that its associated configuration variable is set to Continue. (If it’s set to SilentlyContinue, which is the default for a couple of them, you won’t see any output at all.) Then, use the cmdlet to output a message.
NOTE Some PowerShell hosting applications may display the output from
these cmdlets in a different location. In PrimalScript, for example, debugging
text is written to a different output pane than the script’s main output, allowing the debug text to be more easily separated for analysis. We’re not going to
dive into debugging in this book, but you can read more about the cmdlet in
PowerShell’s help system if you’re interested.
Table 19.1 Alternative output cmdlets
Cmdlet Purpose Configuration variable
Write-Warning Displays warning text, in yellow by
default and preceded by the label
“WARNING:”
$WarningPreference
(Continue by default)
Write-Verbose Displays additional informative text,
in yellow by default and preceded by
the label “VERBOSE:”
$VerbosePreference
(SilentlyContinue by default)
Write-Debug Displays debugging text, in yellow by
default and preceded by the label
“DEBUG:”
$DebugPreference
(SilentlyContinue by default)
Write-Error Produces an error message $ErrorActionPreference
(Continue by default)

19.6 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need any computer running PowerShell v3.
Write-Host and Write-Output can be a bit tricky to work with. See how many of these
tasks you can complete, and if you get stuck, it’s OK to peek at the sample answers
available on MoreLunches.com.

1 Use Write-Output to display the result of 100 multiplied by 10.
write-output (100*10) or 100*10

2 Use Write-Host to display the result of 100 multiplied by 10.
Any of these approaches work:
@a=100*10
Write-Host $a
Write-Host $a
Write \-Host "The value of 100*10 is $a"
Write-Host (100*10)"

3 Prompt the user to enter a name, and then display that name in yellow text.
$name=Read-Host "Enter a name" Write-host $name -ForegroundColor Yellow


4 Prompt the user to enter a name, and then display that name only if it’s longer
than five characters. Do this all in a single line—don’t use a variable.
That’s all for this lab. Because these cmdlets are all straightforward, we want you to
spend more time experimenting with them on your own. Be sure to do that—we’ll
offer some ideas in the next section.
Read-Host "Enter a name" | where {$_.length -gt 5)


TRY IT NOW After you’ve completed this lab, try completing review lab 3,
which you’ll find in appendix A of this book.
19.7 Further exploration
Spend some time getting comfortable with all of the cmdlets in this chapter. Make sure
you can display verbose output, accept input, and even display a graphical input box.
You’ll be using the commands from this chapter often from here on out, so you should
read their help files and even jot down quick syntax reminders for future reference.
