Sessions: remote control with less work

In chapter 13, we introduced you to PowerShell’s remoting features. In that chapter, you used two primary cmdlets—Invoke-Command and Enter-PSSession—to
access both one-to-many and one-to-one remote control. Those two cmdlets
worked by creating a new remoting connection, doing whatever work you specified,
and then closing that connection.
 There’s nothing wrong with that approach, but it can be tiring to have to continually specify computer names, credentials, alternative port numbers, and so on.
In this chapter, we’ll look at an easier, more reusable way to tackle remoting. You’ll
also learn about a third way to use remoting that’ll also come in handy.


20.1 Making PowerShell remoting a bit easier
Any time you need to connect to a remote computer, using either Invoke-Command
or Enter-PSSession, you have to at least specify the computer’s name (or names, if
you’re invoking a command on multiple computers). Depending on your environment, you may also have to specify alternative credentials, which means being
prompted for a password. You might also need to specify alternative ports or
authentication mechanisms, depending upon how your organization has configured remoting.
 None of that is difficult to specify, but it can be tedious to have to repeat the
process again and again. Fortunately, we know of a better way: reusable sessions.

20.2 Creating and using reusable sessions
A session is a persistent connection between your copy of PowerShell and a remote
copy of PowerShell. When the session is active, both your computer and the remote
machine devote a small amount of memory and processor time toward maintaining
the connection, although there’s little network traffic involved in the connection.
PowerShell maintains a list of all the sessions you’ve opened, and you can use those
sessions to invoke commands or to enter a remote shell.
 To create a new session, use the New-PSSession cmdlet. Specify the computer
name (or names), and, if necessary, specify an alternative username, port, authentication mechanism, and so forth. The result will be a session object, which is stored in
PowerShell’s memory:
PS C:\> new-pssession -computername server-r2,server17,dc5
To retrieve those sessions, run Get-PSSession:
PS C:\> get-pssession
Although that works, we prefer to create the sessions and then immediately store
them in a variable. For example, Don has three IIS-based web servers that he routinely
reconfigures by using Invoke-Command. To make the process easier, he stores those
sessions in a specific variable:
PS C:\> $iis_servers = new-pssession -comp web1,web2,web3
➥-credential WebAdmin
Never forget that those sessions consume resources. If you close the shell, they’ll close
automatically, but if you’re not actively using them, it’s a good idea to manually close
them even if you’re planning to continue using the shell for other tasks.
 To close a session, use the Remove-PSSession cmdlet. For example, to close only
the IIS sessions, use the following command:
PS C:\> $iis_servers | remove-pssession
Or, if you want to close all open sessions, use this next command:
PS C:\> get-pssession | remove-pssession
That was easy enough.
 But once you get some sessions up and running, what will you do with them? For
the next couple of sections, we’ll assume you’ve created a variable named $sessions
that contains at least two sessions. We’ll use localhost and SERVER-R2 (you should
specify your own computer names). Using localhost isn’t cheating: PowerShell starts
up a real remoting session with another copy of itself. Keep in mind that this will only
work if you’ve enabled remoting on all computers to which you’re connected, so
revisit chapter 13 if you haven’t enabled remoting.


TRY IT NOW Start to follow along and run these commands, and be sure to
use valid computer names. If you only have one computer, use both its name
and localhost.


Here’s how we’ll get our sessions up and running:
PS C:\> $sessions = New-PSSession -comp SERVER-R2,localhost
Bear in mind that we’ve already enabled remoting on these computers and that
they’re all in the same domain. Revisit chapter 13 if you’d like a refresher on how to
enable remoting.


20.3 Using sessions with Enter-PSSession
As we hope you recall from chapter 13, the Enter-PSSession cmdlet is the one you
use to engage a one-to-one remote interactive shell with a single remote computer.
Rather than specifying a computer name with the cmdlet, you can specify a single session object. Because our $sessions variable has two session objects, we must specify
one of them using an index (which you first learned to do in chapter 18):
PS C:\> enter-pssession -session $sessions[0]
[server-r2]: PS C:\Users\Administrator\Documents>
You can see that our prompt changed to indicate that we’re now controlling a remote
computer. Exit-PSSession will return us back to the local prompt, but the session will
remain open for additional use:
[server-r2]: PS C:\Users\Administrator\Documents> exit-pssession
PS C:\>
You might have a tough time remembering which index number goes with which
computer. In that case, you can take advantage of the properties of a session object.
For example, when we pipe $sessions to Gm, we get the following output:
PS C:\> $sessions | gm
 TypeName: System.Management.Automation.Runspaces.PSSession
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
Equals Method bool Equals(System.Object obj)
GetHashCode Method int GetHashCode()
Above and beyond
There’s a cool syntax that allows you to create multiple sessions with one command
and have each session assigned to a unique variable (instead of having them all
lumped into one variable, as we previously did):
$s_server1,$s_server2 = new-pssession -computer server-r2,dc01
This syntax puts the session for SERVER-R2 into $s_server1, and the session for
DC01 into $s_server2, which can make it easier to use those sessions independently.
But use caution: we’ve seen instances where the sessions aren’t created in exactly
the order you specify, so $s_server1 might end up containing the session for DC01
instead of SERVER-R2. You can display the variable’s contents to see which computer it’s connected to.

GetType Method type GetType()
ToString Method string ToString()
ApplicationPrivateData Property System.Management.Automation.PSPr...
Availability Property System.Management.Automation.Runs...
ComputerName Property System.String ComputerName {get;}
ConfigurationName Property System.String ConfigurationName {...
Id Property System.Int32 Id {get;}
InstanceId Property System.Guid InstanceId {get;}
Name Property System.String Name {get;set;}
Runspace Property System.Management.Automation.Runs...
State ScriptProperty System.Object State {get=$this.Ru...
In the preceding output, you can see that the session object has a ComputerName property, which means you can filter for that session:
PS C:\> enter-pssession -session ($sessions |
➥where { $_.computername -eq 'server-r2' })
[server-r2]: PS C:\Users\Administrator\Documents>
That’s awkward syntax, though. If you need to use a single session from a variable, and
you can’t remember which index number is which, it might be easier to forget about
using the variable.
 Even though you stored your session objects in the variable, they’re also still stored
in PowerShell’s master list of open sessions. That means you can access them by using
Get-PSSession:
PS C:\> enter-pssession -session (get-pssession -computer server-r2)
Get-PSSession will retrieve the session having the computer named SERVER-R2 and
pass it to the -session parameter of Enter-PSSession.
 When we first figured out that technique, we were impressed, but it also led us to
dig a bit deeper. We pulled up the full help for Enter-PSSession and read more
closely about the -session parameter. Here’s what we looked at:
-Session <PSSession>
 Specifies a Windows PowerShell session (PSSession) to use for the
 interactive session. This parameter takes a session object. You ca
 n also use the Name, InstanceID, or ID parameters to specify a PSS
 ession.
 Enter a variable that contains a session object or a command that
 creates or gets a session object, such as a New-PSSession or Get-P
 SSession command. You can also pipe a session object to Enter-PSSe
 ssion. You can submit only one PSSession with this parameter. If y
 ou enter a variable that contains more than one PSSession, the com
 mand fails.
 When you use Exit-PSSession or the EXIT keyword, the interactive s
 ession ends, but the PSSession that you created remains open and a
 vailable for use.
 Required? false
 Position? 1
 Default value
 Accept pipeline input? true (ByValue, ByPropertyName)
 Accept wildcard characters? True

If you think back to chapter 9, you’ll find that pipeline input information near the end
of the help interesting. It tells us that the -session parameter can accept a PSSession
object from the pipeline. We know that Get-PSSession produces PSSession objects,
so the following syntax should also work:
PS C:\> Get-PSSession -ComputerName SERVER-R2 | Enter-PSSession
[server-r2]: PS C:\Users\Administrator\Documents>
And it does work. We think that’s a much more elegant way to retrieve a single session,
even if you’ve stored them all in a variable.
TIP Storing sessions in a variable is fine as a convenience. But keep in mind
that PowerShell is already storing a list of all open sessions; having them in a
variable is only useful when you want to refer to a bunch of sessions at once,
as you’ll see in the next section.
20.4 Using sessions with Invoke-Command
Sessions show their usefulness with Invoke-Command, which you’ll remember you use
to send a command (or an entire script) to multiple remote computers in parallel.
With our sessions in a $sessions variable, we can easily target them all with the following command:
PS C:\> invoke-command -command { get-wmiobject -class win32_process }
➥-session $sessions
Notice that we’re sending a Get-WmiObject command to the remote computers. We
could have chosen to use Get-WmiObject’s own -computername parameter, but we
didn’t do so for the following four reasons:
 Remoting works over a single, predefined port; WMI doesn’t. Remoting is therefore easier to use with firewalled computers, because it’s easier to make the necessary firewall exceptions. Microsoft’s Windows Firewall provides a specific
exception for WMI that includes the stateful inspection necessary to make
WMI’s random port selection (called endpoint mapping) work properly, but it can
be difficult to manage with some third-party firewall products. With remoting,
it’s an easy, single port.
 Pulling all of the processes can be labor-intensive. Using the Invoke-Command
cmdlet gets each computer to do its own share of the work and sending the
results back.
 Remoting operates in parallel, contacting up to 32 computers at once by
default. WMI only works sequentially with one computer at a time.
 We can’t use our predefined sessions with Get-WmiObject, but we can use them
with Invoke-Command.
NOTE The new CIM cmdlets (like Get-CimInstance) in PowerShell v3 don’t
have a -computerName parameter like Get-WmiObject does. These new
cmdlets are designed for you to send via Invoke-Command when you want to
run them against a remote computer.

The -session parameter of Invoke-Command can also be fed with a parenthetical command, much as we’ve done with computer names in previous chapters. For example,
the following sends a command to every session connected to a computer whose
name starts with “loc”:
PS C:\> invoke-command -command { get-wmiobject -class win32_process }
➥-session (get-pssession -comp loc*)
You might expect that Invoke-Command would be able to receive session objects from
the pipeline, as you know Enter-PSSession can. But a glance at the full help for
Invoke-Command shows that it can’t do that particular pipeline trick. Too bad, but the
preceding example of using a parenthetical expression provides the same functionality without too difficult a syntax.
20.5 Implicit remoting: importing a session
Implicit remoting, for us, is one of the coolest and most useful—possibly the coolest
and the most useful—feature a command-line interface has ever had, on any operating
system, ever. And unfortunately, it’s barely documented in PowerShell. Sure, the necessary commands are well-documented, but how they come together to form this
incredible capability isn’t mentioned. Fortunately, we have you covered on this one.
 Let’s review the scenario: You already know that Microsoft is shipping more and
more modules and snap-ins with Windows and other products, but sometimes you
can’t install those modules and snap-ins on your local computer for one reason or
another. The ActiveDirectory module, which shipped for the first time with Windows
Server 2008 R2, is a perfect example: it only exists on Windows Server 2008 R2 and on
Windows 7 machines that have the Remote Server Administration Tools (RSAT)
installed. What if your computer is running Windows XP or Windows Vista? Are you
out of luck? No. You can use implicit remoting.
 Let’s look at the entire process in a single example:
PS C:\> $session = new-pssession -comp server-r2
PS C:\> invoke-command -command
➥{ import-module activedirectory }
➥-session $session
PS C:\> import-pssession -session $session
➥-module activedirectory
➥-prefix rem
ModuleType Name ExportedCommands
---------- ---- ----------------
Script tmp_2b9451dc-b973-495d... {Set-ADOrganizationalUnit, Get-ADD...
 Here’s what’s happening in that example:
1 We started by establishing a session with a remote computer that has the ActiveDirectory module installed B. We’ll need that computer to be running PowerShell v2 or later (which Windows Server 2008 R2 and later can do), and we must
enable remoting.
Establishes
connection
B
C Loads remote module
Imports remote
commands
D
Reviews
temporary
local module
E

2 We tell the remote computer to import its local ActiveDirectory module C.
That’s just one example; we could have chosen to load any module, or even add
a PSSnapin, if that’s what we needed. Because the session is still open, the module stays loaded on the remote computer.
3 We then tell our computer to import the commands from that remote
session D. We only want the commands in the ActiveDirectory module, and
when they’re imported we want a “rem” prefix to be added to each command’s
noun. That allows us to keep track of the remote commands more easily. It also
means the commands won’t conflict with any same-named commands already
loaded into our shell.
4 PowerShell creates a temporary module on our computer that represents the
remote commands E. The commands aren’t copied over; instead, PowerShell
creates shortcuts for them, and those shortcuts point to the remote machine.
Now we can run the ActiveDirectory module commands, or even ask for help. Instead
of running New-ADUser, we’d run New-remADUser, because we added that “rem” prefix
to the commands’ nouns. The commands will remain available until we either close
the shell or close that session with the remote computer. When we open a new shell,
we’ll have to repeat this process to regain access to the remote commands.
 When we run these commands, they don’t execute on our local machine. Instead,
they’re implicitly remoted to the remote computer. It executes them for us and sends
the results to our computer.
 We can envision a world where we don’t ever install administrative tools on our
computers again. What a hassle we’d avoid. Today, you need tools that can run on
your computer’s operating system and talk to whatever remote server you’re trying to
manage—and getting everything to match up can be impossible. In the future, you
won’t do that. You’ll use implicit remoting. Servers will offer their management features as another service, via Windows PowerShell.
 Now for the bad news: the results brought to your computer through implicit
remoting are all deserialized, meaning that the objects’ properties are copied into an
XML file for transmission across the network. The objects you receive this way don’t
have any methods. In most cases, that’s not a problem, but some modules and snap-ins
produce objects that you’re meant to use in a more programmatic way, and those
don’t lend themselves to implicit remoting. We hope you’ll encounter few (if any)
objects with this limitation, as a reliance on methods violates some PowerShell design
practices. If you do run into such objects, you won’t be able to use them through
implicit remoting.


20.6 Disconnected sessions
PowerShell v3 introduced two improvements to its remote control capabilities.
 First, sessions are much less fragile, meaning they can survive brief network hiccups and other transient interruptions. You get that benefit even if you aren’t explicitly using a session object. Even if you’ve used something like Enter-PSSession with

its -ComputerName parameter, you’re technically still using a session under the hood,
so you get the more robust connectivity.
 The other new feature in v3 is one you have to explicitly use: disconnected sessions. Say you’re sitting on COMPUTER1, logged in as Admin1 (who is a member of
the Domain Admins group), and you create a new connection to COMPUTER2:
PS C:\> New-PSSession -ComputerName COMPUTER2
Id Name ComputerName State
-- ----------------- ------------- -----
 4 Session4 COMPUTER2 Opened
You can then disconnect that session. You still do this on COMPUTER1, where you’re
sitting, and it disengages the connection between the two computers, but it leaves the
copy of PowerShell up and running on COMPUTER2. Note that you do this by specifying the session’s ID number, which was displayed when you first created the session:
PS C:\> Disconnect-PSSession -Id 4
Id Name ComputerName State
-- ----------------- ------------- -----
 4 Session4 COMPUTER2 Disconnected
This is something you obviously need to think about—you’re leaving a copy of PowerShell running on COMPUTER2. Assigning useful idle timeout periods and so forth
becomes important. In earlier versions of PowerShell, a session that you disconnected
went away, so you had no cleanup. With v3, it’s possible to litter up your environment
with running sessions, which means you have to exercise a bit more responsibility.
 But here’s the cool part: we’ll log into another computer, COMPUTER3, as the
same Domain Admin named Admin1, and retrieve a list of sessions running on
COMPUTER2:
PS C:\> Get-PSSession -computerName COMPUTER2
Id Name ComputerName State
-- ----------------- ------------- -----
 4 Session4 COMPUTER2 Disconnected
Neat, right? You couldn’t see this session if you’d logged in as a different user, even as
another administrator; you can only see the sessions you created on COMPUTER2. But
now, having seen it, you can reconnect it:
PS C:\> Get-PSSession -computerName COMPUTER2 | Connect-PSSession
Id Name ComputerName State
-- ----------------- ------------- -----
 4 Session4 COMPUTER2 Open
Let’s spend some time talking about managing these sessions. In PowerShell’s
WSMan: drive, you’ll find a number of settings that can help you keep disconnected
sessions under control. You can also centrally configure most of these via Group Policy. The key settings to look for include the following:

 In WSMan:\localhost\Shell:
– IdleTimeout specifies how long a session can be idle before it’s shut down
automatically. The default is about 2,000 hours, or about 84 days.
– MaxConcurrentUsers specifies how many different users can have a session
open at once.
– MaxShellRunTime determines the maximum amount of time a session can be
open. The default is, for all practical purposes, infinite. Keep in mind that
IdleTimeout can override this if the shell is sitting idle, as opposed to running commands.
– MaxShellsPerUser sets a limit on how many sessions a single user can have
open at once. Multiply this by MaxConcurrentUsers to figure out the maximum possible number of sessions, for all users, on the computer.
 In WSMan:\localhost\Service:
– MaxConnections sets the upper limit on incoming connections to the entire
remoting infrastructure. Even if you allow a larger number of shells per user
or a maximum number of users, MaxConnections is the absolute limit on
incoming connections.
As an administrator, you obviously have a higher level of responsibility than a plain old
user. It’s up to you to keep track of your sessions, particularly if you’ll be disconnecting and reconnecting. Sensible timeout settings can help ensure that shell sessions
don’t sit around idling for long stretches of time.



20.7 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need a Windows Server 2008 R2 or Windows Server
2012 computer running PowerShell v3. If you’ve access only to a client computer (running Windows 7 or Windows 8), you won’t be able to complete steps 6 through 9 of this lab.
To complete this lab, you’ll want to have two computers: one to remote from, and
another to remote to. If you only have one computer, use its computer name to
remote to it. You should get a similar experience that way.

TIP In chapter 1, we mentioned a multicomputer virtual environment at
CloudShare.com. You’ll find other, similar services that offer cloud-based virtual machines. By using CloudShare, we didn’t have to set up the Windows
OS, because the service had ready-made templates for us to use. You do have
to pay a fee for the service, and it isn’t available in all countries, but if you can
use it, it’s a great way to get a lab environment running if you’re not able to
run one locally.


1 Close all open sessions in your shell.
get-pssession | Remove-PSSession

2 Establish a session to a remote computer. Save the session in a variable named
$session.
$session=new-pssesion -computername locahost


3 Use the $session variable to establish a one-to-one remote shell session with
the remote computer. Display a list of processes, and then exit.
enter-pssession $session
Get-Process
Exit

4 Use the $session variable with Invoke-Command to get a list of services from the
remote computer.
invoke-command -ScriptBlock { get-service }  -Session #session

5 Use Get-PSSession and Invoke-Command to get a list of the 20 most recent
Security event log entries from the remote computer.
Invoke-Command -ScriptBlock {get-eventlog -LogName System -Newest 20} -Session {Get-PSSession}

6 Use Invoke-Command and your $session variable to load the ServerManager
module on the remote computer.
Invoke-Command -ScriptBlock {Import-Module ServerManager}  -Session $session

7 Import the ServerManager module’s commands from the remote computer to
your computer. Add the prefix “rem” to the imported commands’ nouns.
Import-PSSession -Session $session -Prefix rem -Module ServerManager

8 Run the imported Get-WindowsFeature command.
Get -RemWindowsFeature

9 Close the session that’s in your $session variable.
Remove -PSSession


NOTE Thanks to a new feature in PowerShell v3, you could also accomplish
steps 6 and 7 with a single step, by using the Import-Module command. Feel
free to review the help for this command and see if you can figure out how to
use it to import a module from a remote computer.


20.8 Further exploration
Take a quick inventory of your environment: what PowerShell-enabled products do
you have? Exchange Server? SharePoint Server? VMware vSphere? System Center Virtual Machine Manager? These and other products all include PowerShell modules or
snap-ins, many of which are accessible via PowerShell remoting. 
