You call this scripting?
So far, you could have accomplished everything in this book using PowerShell’s
command-line interface. You haven’t had to write a single script. That’s a big deal
for us, because we see a lot of administrators initially shying away from scripting,
(rightly) perceiving it as a kind of programming, and (correctly) feeling that learning it can sometimes take more time than it’s worth. Hopefully, you’ve seen how
much you can accomplish in PowerShell without having to become a programmer.
 But at this point, you may also be starting to feel that constantly retyping the
same commands, over and over, is going to become pretty tedious. You’re right, so
in this chapter we’re going to dive into PowerShell scripting—but we’re still not
going to be programming. Instead, we’re going to focus on scripts as little more
than a way of saving our fingers from unnecessary retyping.
21.1 Not programming, more like batch files
Most Windows administrators have, at one point or another, created a commandline batch file (which usually has a .BAT or .CMD filename extension). These are
nothing more than simple text files that you can edit with Windows Notepad, containing a list of commands to be executed in a specific order. Technically, you call
those commands a script, because like a Hollywood script, they tell the performer
(your computer) exactly what to do and say, and in what order to do and say it. But
batch files rarely look like programming, in part because the Cmd.exe shell has a
very limited language that doesn’t permit incredibly complicated scripts.
 PowerShell scripts—or batch files, if you prefer—work similarly. Simply list the
commands that you want run, and the shell will execute those commands in the


order specified. You can create a script by simply copying a command from the host
window and pasting it into Notepad. Of course, Notepad is a pretty horrible text editor. We expect you’ll be happier with the PowerShell ISE, or with a third-party editor
like PowerGUI, PrimalScript, or PowerShell Plus.
 The ISE, in fact, makes “scripting” practically indistinguishable from using the
shell interactively. When using the ISE’s Script Editor Pane, you simply type the command or commands you want to run, and then click the Run button in the toolbar to
execute those commands. Click Save and you’ve created a script without having to
copy and paste anything at all.
21.2 Making commands repeatable
The idea behind PowerShell scripts is, first and foremost, to make it easier to run a
given command over and over, without having to manually retype it every time. That
being the case, we need to come up with a command that you’ll want to run over and
over again, and use that as an example throughout this chapter. We want to make this
decently complex, so we’ll start with something from WMI and add in some filtering,
sorting, and other stuff.
 At this point, we’re going to switch to using the PowerShell ISE instead of the normal console window, because the ISE will make it easier for us to migrate our command into a script. Frankly, the ISE makes it easier to type complex commands,
because you get a full-screen editor instead of working on a single line within the console host.
 Here’s our command:
Get-WmiObject -class Win32_LogicalDisk -computername localhost
➥-filter "drivetype=3" |
 Sort-Object -property DeviceID |
 Format-Table -property DeviceID,
 @{label='FreeSpace(MB)';expression={$_.FreeSpace / 1MB -as [int]}},
 @{label='Size(GB';expression={$_.Size / 1GB -as [int]}},
 @{label='%Free';expression={$_.FreeSpace / $_.Size * 100 -as [int]}}
TIP Remember, you can use name instead of label, and either can be abbreviated to a single character, n or l. But it’s easy for a lowercase L to look like
the number 1, so be careful!
Figure 21.1 shows how we’ve entered this into the ISE. Notice that we selected the twopane layout by using the toolbar button on the far left of the layout choices. Also
notice that we formatted our command so that each physical line ends in either a pipe
character or a comma. By doing so, we’re forcing the shell to recognize these multiple
lines as a single, one-line command. You could do the same thing in the console host,
but this formatting is especially effective in the ISE because it makes the command a
lot easier to read. Also notice that we’ve used full cmdlet names and parameter names
and that we’ve specified every parameter name rather than using positional parameters. All of that will make our script easier to read and follow either for someone else,
or in the future when we might have forgotten what our original intent was.

We ran the command by clicking the green Run toolbar icon in the ISE (you could
also press F5) to test it, and our output shows that it’s working perfectly. Here’s a neat
trick in the ISE: you can highlight a portion of your command and press F8 to just run
the highlighted portion. Because we’ve formatted the command so that there’s one
distinct command per physical line, that makes it easy for us to test our command bit
by bit. We could highlight and run the first line independently. If we were satisfied
with the output, we could highlight the first and second lines, and run them. If it
worked as expected, we could run the whole command.
 At this point, we can save the command—and we can start calling it a script now.
We’ll save it as Get-DiskInventory.ps1. We like giving scripts cmdlet-style “verb-noun”
names. You can see how this script is going to start to look and work a lot like a cmdlet,
so it makes sense to give it a cmdlet-style name.
TRY IT NOW We’re assuming that you have already completed chapter 14 and
enabled scripting by setting a more permissive execution policy. If you
haven’t done so, then you should flip back to chapter 17 and complete its lab
so that scripts will run in your copy of PowerShell.
21.3 Parameterizing commands
When you think about running a command over and over, you might realize that
some portion of the command is going to have to change from time to time. For
example, suppose you wanted to give Get-DiskInventory.ps1 to some of your colleagues, who might be less experienced in using PowerShell. It’s a pretty complex,
hard-to-type command, and they might appreciate having it bundled into an easier-torun script. But, as written, the script only runs against the local computer. You can
Figure 21.1 Entering and running a command in the ISE

certainly imagine that some of your colleagues might want to get a disk inventory from
one or more remote computers instead.
 One option would be to have them open up the script and change the
-computer-name parameter’s value. But it’s entirely possible that they wouldn’t be
comfortable doing so, and there’s a chance that they’ll change something else and
break the script entirely. It would be better to provide a formal way for them to pass
in a different computer name (or a set of names). At this stage, you need to identify
the things that might need to change when the command is run, and replace those
things with variables.
 We’ll set the computer name variable to a static value for now, so that we can still
test the script. Here’s our revised script.
$computername = 'localhost'
Get-WmiObject -class Win32_LogicalDisk `
 -computername $computername `
 -filter "drivetype=3" |
 Sort-Object -property DeviceID |
 Format-Table -property DeviceID,
 @{label='FreeSpace(MB)';expression={$_.FreeSpace / 1MB -as [int]}},
 @{label='Size(GB';expression={$_.Size / 1GB -as [int]}},
 @{label='%Free';expression={$_.FreeSpace / $_.Size * 100 -as [int]}}
We’ve done three things here, two of which are functional and one of which is purely
cosmetic:
 We’ve added a variable, $computername, and set it equal to localhost B. We’ve
noticed that most PowerShell commands that accept a computer name use the
parameter name -computername, and we want to duplicate that convention,
which is why we chose the variable name that we did.
 We’ve replaced the value for the -computername parameter with our variable D.
Right now, the script should run exactly the same as it did before (and we tested
to make sure it does), because we’ve put localhost into the $computername
variable.
 We added a backtick after the -computername parameter and its value C. This
escapes, or takes away the special meaning of, the carriage return at the end of
the line. That tells PowerShell that the next physical line is part of this same
command. You don’t need to do that when the line ends in a pipe character or
a comma, but in order to fit the code within this book, we needed to break the
line a bit before the pipe character. This will only work if the backtick character
is the last thing on the line!
Once again, we’ve been careful to run our script and verify that it’s still working. We
always do that after making any kind of change, to make sure we haven’t introduced
some random typo or other error.
Listing 21.1 Get-DiskInventory.ps1, with a parameterized command
B Sets new variable
Breaks line
C with backtick
D Uses variable

21.4 Creating a parameterized script
Now that we’ve identified the elements of the script that might change from time to
time, we need to provide a way for someone else to specify new values for those elements. In other words, we need to take that hardcoded $computername variable and
turn it into an input parameter.
 PowerShell makes this really easy.
param (
 $computername = 'localhost'
)
Get-WmiObject -class Win32_LogicalDisk -computername $computername `
 -filter "drivetype=3" |
 Sort-Object -property DeviceID |
 Format-Table -property DeviceID,
 @{label='FreeSpace(MB)';expression={$_.FreeSpace / 1MB -as [int]}},
 @{label='Size(GB';expression={$_.Size / 1GB -as [int]}},
 @{label='%Free';expression={$_.FreeSpace / $_.Size * 100 -as [int]}}
All we did was add a Param() block around our variable declaration B. This defines
$computername as a parameter, and specifies that localhost is the default value to be
used if the script is run without a computer name being specified. You don’t have to
provide a default value, but we like to do so when there’s a reasonable value that we
can think of.
 All parameters declared in this fashion are both named and positional, meaning
that we can now run the script from the command line in any of these ways:
PS C:\> .\Get-DiskInventory.ps1 server-r2
PS C:\> .\Get-DiskInventory.ps1 -computername server-r2
PS C:\> .\Get-DiskInventory.ps1 -comp server-r2
In the first instance, we used the parameter positionally, providing a value but not the
parameter name. In the second and third instances, we specified the parameter name,
but in the third instance we abbreviated that name in keeping with PowerShell’s normal rules for parameter name abbreviation. Note that in all three cases, we had to
specify a path (.\, which is the current folder) to the script, because the shell won’t
automatically search the current directory to find the script.
 You can specify as many parameters as you need to by separating them with commas. For example, suppose that we wanted to also parameterize the filter criteria.
Right now, it’s only retrieving logical disks of type 3, which represents fixed disks. We
could change that to a parameter, as in the following listing.
param (
 $computername = 'localhost',
 $drivetype = 3
)
Listing 21.2 Get-DiskInventory.ps1, with an input parameter
Listing 21.3 Get-DiskInventory.ps1, with an additional parameter
B Param block
Specifying additional
parameter

Get-WmiObject -class Win32_LogicalDisk -computername $computername `
 -filter "drivetype=$drivetype" |
 Sort-Object -property DeviceID |
 Format-Table -property DeviceID,
 @{label='FreeSpace(MB)';expression={$_.FreeSpace / 1MB -as [int]}},
 @{label='Size(GB';expression={$_.Size / 1GB -as [int]}},
 @{label='%Free';expression={$_.FreeSpace / $_.Size * 100 -as [int]}}
Notice that we took advantage of PowerShell’s ability to replace variables with their
values inside of double quotation marks (you learned about that trick in chapter 18).
 We can run this script in any of the three original ways, although we could also
omit either parameter if we wanted to use the default value for it. Here are some
permutations:
PS C:\> .\Get-DiskInventory.ps1 server-r2 3
PS C:\> .\Get-DiskInventory.ps1 -comp server-r2 -drive 3
PS C:\> .\Get-DiskInventory.ps1 server-r2
PS C:\> .\Get-DiskInventory.ps1 -drive 3
In the first instance, we specified both parameters positionally, in the order in which
they’re declared within the Param() block. In the second case, we specified abbreviated parameter names for both. The third time, we omitted -drivetype entirely,
using the default value of 3. In the last instance, we left off -computername, using the
default value of localhost.
21.5 Documenting your script
Only a truly mean person would create a useful script and not tell anyone how to use
it. Fortunately, PowerShell makes it easy to add help into your script, using comments.
You’re welcome to add typical programming-style comments to your scripts, but if
you’re using full cmdlet and parameter names, sometimes your script’s operation will
be obvious. By using a special comment syntax, however, you can provide help that
mimics PowerShell’s own help files.
 This listing shows what we’ve added to our script.
<#
.SYNOPSIS
Get-DiskInventory retrieves logical disk information from one or
more computers.
.DESCRIPTION
Get-DiskInventory uses WMI to retrieve the Win32_LogicalDisk
instances from one or more computers. It displays each disk's
drive letter, free space, total size, and percentage of free
space.
.PARAMETER computername
The computer name, or names, to query. Default: Localhost.
.PARAMETER drivetype
The drive type to query. See Win32_LogicalDisk documentation
for values. 3 is a fixed disk, and is the default.
Listing 21.4 Adding help to Get-DiskInventory.ps1
Using parameter

.EXAMPLE
Get-DiskInventory -computername SERVER-R2 -drivetype 3
#>
param (
 $computername = 'localhost',
 $drivetype = 3
)
Get-WmiObject -class Win32_LogicalDisk -computername $computername `
 -filter "drivetype=$drivetype" |
 Sort-Object -property DeviceID |
 Format-Table -property DeviceID,
 @{label='FreeSpace(MB)';expression={$_.FreeSpace / 1MB -as [int]}},
 @{label='Size(GB';expression={$_.Size / 1GB -as [int]}},
 @{label='%Free';expression={$_.FreeSpace / $_.Size * 100 -as [int]}}
Normally, PowerShell ignores anything on a line that follows a # symbol, meaning tha t# designates a line as a comment. We’ve used the  block comment syntax instead,
because we had several lines of comments and didn’t want to have to start each line
with a separate # character.
 Now we can drop to the normal console host and ask for help by running help
.\Get-DiskInventory (again, you have to provide a path because this is a script and
not a built-in cmdlet). Figure 21.2 shows the results, which proves that PowerShell is
reading those comments and creating a standard help display. We can even run help
.\Get-DiskInventory -full to get full help, including parameter information and
our example. Figure 21.3 shows those results.
Figure 21.2 Viewing the help by using the normal help command

These special comments, called comment-based help, must appear at the beginning of
your script file. There are several keywords in addition to .DESCRIPTION, .SYNOPSIS,
and the others we’ve used. For a full list, run help about_comment_based _help in
PowerShell.
21.6 One script, one pipeline
We normally tell folks that anything in a script will run exactly as if you manually typed
it into the shell, or if you copied the script to the clipboard and pasted it into the shell.
That’s not entirely true, though.
 Consider this simple script:
Get-Process
Get-Service
Just two commands. But what happens if you were to type those commands into the
shell manually, hitting Return after each?
TRY IT NOW You’re going to have to run these commands on your own to see
the results; they create fairly long output and it won’t fit well within this book
or even in a screenshot.
When you run the commands individually, you’re creating a new pipeline for each
command. At the end of each pipeline, PowerShell looks to see what needs to be formatted and creates the tables that you undoubtedly saw. The key here is that each command runs in a separate pipeline. Figure 21.4 illustrates this: two completely separate
Figure 21.3 Help options like -example, -detailed, and -full are supported for
comment-based help.

commands, two individual pipelines, two formatting processes, and two differentlooking sets of results.
 You may think we’re crazy for taking so much time to explain something that probably seems obvious, but it’s important. Here’s what happens when you run those two
commands individually:
1 You run Get-Process.
2 The command places Process objects into the pipeline.
3 The pipeline ends in Out-Default, which picks up the objects.
4 Out-Default passes the objects to Out-Host, which calls on the formatting system to produce text output (you learned about this in chapter 10).
5 The text output appears on the screen.
6 You run Get-Service.
7 The command places Service objects into the pipeline.
8 The pipeline ends in Out-Default, which picks up the objects.
9 Out-Default passes the objects to Out-Host, which calls on the formatting system to produce text output.
10 The text output appears on the screen.
So you’re now looking at a screen that contains the results from two commands. We
want you to put those two commands into a script file. Name it Test.ps1 or something
simple. Before you run the script, though, copy those two commands onto the clipboard. In the ISE, you can highlight both lines of text and press Ctrl-C to get them
into the clipboard.
Get-Process
Process
objects Out-Default
Out-Host
Get-Service
Service
objects Out-Default
Out-Host
Console
window
(output)
Figure 21.4 Two commands, two pipelines, and two
sets of output in a single console window

 With those commands in the clipboard, go to the PowerShell console host and
press Enter. That will paste the commands from the clipboard into the shell. They
should execute exactly the same way, because the carriage returns also get pasted.
Once again, you’re running two distinct commands in two separate pipelines.
 Now go back to the ISE and run the script. Different results, right? Why is that?
 In PowerShell, every command executes within a single pipeline, and that includes
scripts. Within a script, any command that produces pipeline output will be writing to
a single pipeline: the one that the script itself is running in. Take a look at figure 21.5.
 We’ll try to explain what happened:
1 The script runs Get-Process.
2 The command places Process objects into the pipeline.
3 The script runs Get-Service.
4 The command places Service objects into the pipeline.
5 The pipeline ends in Out-Default, which picks up both kinds of objects.
6 Out-Default passes the objects to Out-Host, which calls on the formatting system to produce text output.
7 Because the Process objects are first, the shell’s formatting system selects a format appropriate to processes. That’s why they look normal. But then the shell
runs into the Service objects. It can’t produce a whole new table at this point,
so it winds up producing a list.
8 The text output appears on the screen.
This different output occurs because the script wrote two kinds of objects to a single
pipeline. This is the important difference between putting commands into a script
and running them manually: within a script, you only have one pipeline to work with.
Normally, your scripts should strive to only output one kind of object, so that PowerShell can produce sensible text output.
Get-Process
Get-Service
Service
objects
Process
objects Out-Default
Out-Host
Console
window
(output)
Figure 21.5 All commands within a script run within
that script’s single pipeline.

21.7 A quick look at scope
The last topic we need to visit is scope. Scopes are a form of container for certain types
of PowerShell elements, primarily aliases, variables, and functions.
 The shell itself is the top-level scope and is called the global scope. When you run a
script, a new scope is created around that script, and it’s called the script scope. The
script scope is subsidiary to the global scope and is said to be a child of the global
scope, which is the script scope’s parent. Functions also get their own private scope.
 Figure 21.6 illustrates these scope relationships, with the global scope containing
its children, and those containing their own children, and so forth.
 A scope only lasts as long as needed to execute whatever is in the scope. That
means the global scope only exists while PowerShell is running, a script scope only
exists while that script is running, and so forth. Once
whatever it is stops running, the scope vanishes, taking
everything inside it with it. PowerShell has some very
specific—and sometimes confusing—rules for scoped
elements like aliases, variables, and functions, but the
main rule is this: If you try to access a scoped element,
PowerShell sees if it exists within the current scope. If it
doesn’t, PowerShell sees if it exists in the current scope’s
parent. It continues going up the relationship tree until
it gets to the global scope.
TRY IT NOW In order to get the proper results, it’s important that you follow
these steps carefully and precisely.
Let’s see this in action. Follow these steps:
1 Close any PowerShell or PowerShell ISE windows you may have open, so that
you can start from scratch.


2 Open a new PowerShell window, and a new PowerShell ISE window.


3 In the ISE, create a script that contains one line: Write $x


4 Save the script as C:\Scope.ps1.


5 In the regular PowerShell window, run the script with C:\Scope. You shouldn’t
see any output. When the script ran, a new scope was created for it. The $x variable didn’t exist in that scope, so PowerShell went to the parent scope—the
global scope—to see if $x existed there. It didn’t exist there, either, so PowerShell
decided that $x was empty, and wrote that (meaning, nothing) as the output.


6 In the normal PowerShell window, run $x = 4. Then, run C:\Scope again. This
time, you should see 4 as the output. The variable $x still wasn’t defined in the
script scope, but PowerShell was able to find it in the global scope, and so the
script used that value.



7 In the ISE, add $x = 10 to the top of the script (before the existing Write command), and save the script.
Figure 21.6 Global, script,
and function (private) scopes

8 In the normal PowerShell window, run C:\Scope again. This time, you’ll see 10
as output. That’s because $x was defined within the script scope, and the shell
didn’t need to look in the global scope. Now run $x in the shell. You’ll see 4,
proving that the value of $x within the script scope didn’t affect the value of $x
within the global scope.
One important concept here is that when a scope defines a variable, alias, or function,
that scope loses access to any variables, aliases, or functions having the same name in a
parent scope. The locally defined element will always be the one PowerShell uses. For
example, if you put New-Alias Dir Get-Service into a script, then within that script
the alias Dir will run Get-Service instead of the usual Get-ChildItem. (In reality, the
shell probably won’t let you do that, because it protects the built-in aliases from being
redefined.) By defining the alias within the script’s scope, you prevent the shell from
going to the parent scope and finding the normal, default Dir. Of course, the script’s
redefinition of Dir will only last for the execution of that script, and the default Dir
defined in the global scope will remain unaffected.
 It’s easy to let this scope stuff confuse you. You can avoid confusion by never relying on anything that’s in any scope other than the current one. So before you try to
access a variable within a script, make sure you’ve already assigned it a value within
that same scope. Parameters in a Param() block are one way to do that, and there are
many other ways to put values and objects into a variable.


21.8 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need any computer running PowerShell v3.
The following command is for you to add to a script. You should first identify any elements that should be parameterized, such as the computer name. Your final script
should define the parameter, and you should create comment-based help within the
script. Run your script to test it, and use the Help command to make sure your
comment-based help works properly. Don’t forget to read the help files referenced
within this chapter for more information.

 Here’s the command:
Get-WmiObject Win32_LogicalDisk -comp "localhost" -filter "drivetype=3" |
Where { $_.FreeSpace / $_.Size -lt .1 } |
Select -Property DeviceID,FreeSpace,Size
Here’s a hint: There are at least two pieces of information that will need to be parameterized. This command is intended to list all drives that have less than a given
amount of free disk space. Obviously, you won’t always want to target localhost, and
you might not want 10% (that is, .1) to be your free space threshold. You could also
choose to parameterize the drive type (which is 3, here), but for this lab leave that
hardcoded with the value 3.
