Advanced remoting configuration

In chapter 13, we did our best to introduce you to PowerShell’s remoting technology. We deliberately left a few stones unturned in order to focus on the core technologies and techniques behind remoting, but in this chapter we want to return
and cover some of the more advanced and unusual features and scenarios. We’ll
admit up front that not everything in this chapter will be usable by everyone—but
we do think everyone should know about these options, in case a need for them
arises in your future.
 Also, we’ll quickly remind you that this book is focused on PowerShell v3. Revisit
chapter 1 if you need help in figuring out which version you’re running; much of
what we cover in this book won’t work in older versions.

23.1 Using other endpoints
As you learned in chapter 13, a single computer can contain multiple endpoints,
which PowerShell also refers to as session configurations. For example, enabling
remoting on a 64-bit machine enables an endpoint for 32-bit PowerShell as well as
64-bit PowerShell, with the 64-bit one being the default.
 You can see a list of available session configurations on any machine you have
Administrator access to:

PS C:\> Get-PSSessionConfiguration
Name : microsoft.powershell
PSVersion : 3.0
StartupScript :
RunAsUser :
Permission : NT AUTHORITY\NETWORK AccessDenied, BUILTIN\Administrators
 AccessAllowed
Name : microsoft.powershell.workflow
PSVersion : 3.0
StartupScript :
RunAsUser :
Permission : NT AUTHORITY\NETWORK AccessDenied, BUILTIN\Administrators
 AccessAllowed
Name : microsoft.powershell32
PSVersion : 3.0
StartupScript :
RunAsUser :
Permission : NT AUTHORITY\NETWORK AccessDenied, BUILTIN\Administrators
 AccessAllowed
Each endpoint has a name; the one named “Microsoft.PowerShell” is the one that
remoting commands like New-PSSession, Enter-PSSession, Invoke-Command, and so
forth will use by default. On a 64-bit system, that endpoint is the 64-bit shell; on a
32-bit system, “Microsoft.PowerShell” is a 32-bit shell.
 You’ll notice that our 64-bit system has an alternative “Microsoft.PowerShell32”
endpoint running a 32-bit shell for backward compatibility. To connect to an alternative endpoint, just specify its name to the -ConfigurationName parameter of a remoting command:
PS C:\> Enter-PSSession -ComputerName DONJONES1D96 -ConfigurationName 'Micr
osoft.PowerShell32'
[DONJONES1D96]: PS C:\Users\donjones\Documents>
When might you use an alternative endpoint? Well, if you needed to run a command
that relied upon a 32-bit PSSnapin, that might be one reason to explicitly connect to
the 32-bit endpoint on a 64-bit machine. You might also have custom endpoints set
up, and might need to connect to one in order to perform some specific task.

23.2 Creating custom endpoints
Creating a custom endpoint is a two-step process:
1 You use New-PSSessionConfigurationFile to create a new session configuration file, which should have a .PSSC filename extension. This file defines many
characteristics of the endpoint, predominantly what commands and capabilities
it will include.
2 You use Register-PSSessionConfiguration to load the .PSSC file and create the
new endpoint within the WinRM service. During registration, you can set numerous operational parameters, such as defining who may connect to the endpoint.
You can change those settings later by using Set-PSSessionConfiguration, if
necessary.

We’ll walk through an example that uses custom endpoints for delegated administration, which is possibly one of their coolest features. We’ll create an endpoint that members of our domain’s HelpDesk group can connect to. Within that endpoint, we’ll
enable the commands that relate to network adapter management—and only those
commands. We don’t plan to give our help desk permission to run those commands,
just to make the commands visible to them. We’ll also configure the endpoint to run
commands under an alternative credential that we provide, so the commands will work
without our help desk team actually having the necessary permissions themselves.

23.2.1 Creating the session configuration
Here’s the command we ran—we’ll format this nicely for the book, but we actually
typed it all on one, long line:
PS C:\> New-PSSessionConfigurationFile
 -Path C:\HelpDeskEndpoint.pssc
 -ModulesToImport NetAdapter
 -SessionType RestrictedRemoteServer
 -CompanyName "Our Company"
 -Author "Don Jones"
 -Description "Net adapter commands for use by help desk"
 -PowerShellVersion '3.0'
There are a couple of key parameters here, which we’ve highlighted in bold. We’ll
explain why we chose the values we did, but we’ll leave it up to you to read the help on
this command to discover its other options.
 The -Path is required, and the filename you provide should end in .PSSC.
 -ModulesToImport lists the modules (in this case, just one named NetAdapter)
that we want available within this endpoint.
 -SessionType RestrictedRemoteServer removes all core PowerShell commands, except for a very short list of necessary ones. Those include
Select-Object, Measure-Object, Get-Command, Get-Help, Exit-PSSession,
and so on.
 -PowerShellVersion defaults to 3.0, but we included it for completeness.
There are also several parameters that start with -Visible, such as -VisibleCmdlets.
Normally, when you import a module using -ModulesToImport, every command in
the module is made visible to people using the final endpoint, but you can use the
-Visible parameters to change that behavior. By listing just the cmdlets, aliases, functions, and providers you want people to see, you’re effectively hiding the rest. That’s a
good way to limit what someone can do with your endpoint. Do be careful when using
these visibility parameters, as they can be a bit confusing. For example, if you import a
module consisting of both cmdlets and functions, then using –VisibleCmdlets only
restricts which of the cmdlets are visible—it will have no effect on the visible functions, meaning they’ll all be visible by default.
 Note that there’s no way to limit the command parameters they can use: PowerShell supports parameter-level restrictions, but to obtain that ability you have to do

some heavier-duty coding in Visual Studio, which is beyond what we’ll cover in this
book. There are some other, advanced tricks you could use, such as creating proxy
functions that hide specific parameters, but those are also beyond the scope of this
book for beginners.

23.2.2 Registering the session
Having created the session configuration file, here’s the command we ran to get it up
and running. Again, we’ll format this nicely for the book, but we typed it all on one
long command line:
PS C:\> Register-PSSessionConfiguration
 -Path .\HelpDeskEndpoint.pssc
 -RunAsCredential COMPANY\HelpDeskProxyAdmin
 -ShowSecurityDescriptorUI
 -Name HelpDesk
This creates a new endpoint named HelpDesk (as opposed to Microsoft.PowerShell or
something else). As shown in figure 23.1, we were prompted for the password for the
COMPANY\HelpDeskProxyAdmin account; this is the account that will be used to run
all commands within the endpoint. We’ll make sure that account has the permissions
needed to run the network adapter commands.
Figure 23.1 Password prompt for our “run as” credential

 We had to answer several “are you sure” prompts, which we strongly suggest that
you read carefully. This command will stop and restart the WinRM service, for example, which could interrupt other administrators attempting to manage the local
machine, so some caution is in order.
 As shown in figure 23.2, we were also given a graphical dialog box to specify which
users may connect to the endpoint. The dialog box is displayed because we used the
-ShowSecurityDescriptorUI parameter, rather than specifying the endpoint’s permissions in the complex Security Descriptor Definition Language (SDDL), which
we’re frankly not all that familiar with. This is a case where the GUI is a good thing—
we’ll add our HelpDesk user group to it, and ensure they have Execute and Read permissions. Execute is the minimum permission needed, given what we plan to have
them doing with the endpoint; Read is the only other thing they should need.
Figure 23.2 Setting the endpoint’s permissions

 With that, we’re done. As you can see from the following (truncated) output, users
of our new endpoint have a very limited set of commands to work with:
PS C:\> Enter-PSSession -ComputerName DONJONES1D96 -ConfigurationName HelpD
esk
[DONJONES1D96]: PS>Get-Command
Capability Name ModuleN
 ame
---------- ---- -------
CIM Disable-NetAdapter NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterBinding NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterChecksumOffload NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterEncapsulatedPacketTaskOffload NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterIPsecOffload NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterLso NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterPowerManagement NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterQos NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterRdma NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterRsc NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterRss NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterSriov NetA...
CIM Disable-NetAdapterVmq NetA...
CIM Enable-NetAdapter NetA...
CIM Enable-NetAdapterBinding NetA...
CIM Enable-NetAdapterChecksumOffload NetA...
CIM Enable-NetAdapterEncapsulatedPacketTaskOffload NetA...
CIM Enable-NetAdapterIPsecOffload NetA...
CIM Enable-NetAdapterLso NetA...
CIM Enable-NetAdapterPowerManagement NetA...
CIM Enable-NetAdapterQos NetA...
This is a great way to create a very specific set of capabilities for a group of users. They
don’t even necessarily need to connect to PowerShell from a console session as we did
for this test; they might be using a GUI tool that utilizes PowerShell remoting under
the hood. Provided that tool only needs these
commands, this technique would be a great way
to give someone this delegated capability and
nothing else.

23.3 Enabling multihop remoting
This is a topic we briefly brought up in
chapter 13, but it deserves a bit more depth. Figure 23.3 depicts the “second hop” or “multihop”
problem: You start on Computer A, and you create a PSSession connection to Computer B.
That’s the first hop, and it’ll probably work fine.
But then you try to ask Computer B to create a
second hop, or connection, to Computer C, and
the operation fails.
Computer B
Computer C
Computer A
First Hop
Second Hop
Figure 23.3 Multihop remoting in
Windows PowerShell

 The problem is related to the way PowerShell delegates your credentials from
Computer A to Computer B. Delegation is the process of enabling Computer B to execute tasks as if it were you, thus ensuring that you can do anything you’d normally
have permission to do, but nothing more. By default, delegation can only traverse one
such hop; Computer B doesn’t have permission to delegate your credential on to a
third computer, Computer C.
 On Windows Vista and later, you can enable this multihop delegation. Two steps
are needed:
1 On your computer (Computer A in the example), run Enable-WSManCredSSP
-Role Client -DelegateComputer x. You’ll replace x with the name of the computer that your credentials may be delegated to. You could specify an individual
computer name, but you might also use wildcards. We don’t recommend using
*, as that presents some real security concerns, but you might authorize an
entire domain: *.company.com, for example.
2 On the server that you’re connecting to first (Computer B in the example), run
Enable-WSManCredSSP -Role Server.
The changes made by the command will be applied to the computers’ local security
policy; you could also manually make these changes via a Group Policy object, which
might make more sense in a large domain environment. Managing this via Group
Policy is beyond the scope of this chapter, but you can find more information in the
help for Enable-WSManCredSSP. Don also authored a Secrets of PowerShell Remoting
guide (http://PowerShellBooks.com/) that covers the policy-related elements in
more detail.

23.4 Digging deeper into remoting authentication
We find that folks tend to think of authentication as a one-way process: you want to
access some remote machine, and you have to provide it with your credentials before
it will let you in. But PowerShell remoting employs mutual authentication, which means
the remote machine must also prove its identity to you. In other words, if you run
Enter-PSSession -computerName DC01, the computer named DC01 has to prove it’s
really DC01 before the connection will complete.
 Why? Normally, your computer will resolve a computer name (like DC01) to an IP
address using the Domain Name System (DNS). DNS isn’t invulnerable to spoofing, so
it’s not unthinkable that an attacker could get in and modify the entry for DC01 to
point to a different IP address—an IP address that the attacker controls. You could
unknowingly connect to DC01, wind up on an imposter computer, and then start delegating your credential to it—bad news! Mutual authentication prevents that from happening: if the computer you connect to can’t prove it’s the one you intended to
connect to, then remoting will fail. That’s a good thing—you don’t want to turn that
protection off without careful planning and consideration.

23.4.1 Defaults for mutual authentication
Microsoft expects most PowerShell usage to occur in an Active Directory domain environment. Provided you connect to computers using their real computer names, as
listed in Active Directory, the domain will handle the mutual authentication for you.
This even happens when you access computers in other, trusting domains. The trick is
that you need to provide PowerShell with a computer name that will accomplish both
of these requirements:
 The name must resolve to an IP address.
 The name must match the computer’s name in the directory.
Providing a computer name from the same domain that you’re in, or a fully qualified
name (computer and domain name, like DC01.COMPANY.LOC) for a trusting domain,
usually accomplishes both of these tasks. But if you need to provide an IP address, or if
you need to provide a different name for DNS to work (such as a CNAME alias), then
the default mutual authentication won’t work. That leaves you with two choices: SSL or
TrustedHosts.

23.4.2 Mutual authentication via SSL
For this technique, you’ll need to obtain an SSL digital certificate for the destination
machine. The certificate must be issued to the same computer name that you’ll type
to access the computer. That is, if you’re running Enter-PSSession -computerName
DC01.COMPANY.LOC -UseSSL -credential COMPANY\Administrator, then the certificate installed on DC01 must be issued to “dc01.company.loc” or the entire process will
fail. Note that the -credential parameter is mandatory in this scenario.
 After getting your certificate, you need to install it into the Personal certificate store
for the computer account—something best accomplished with the Certificates snap-in
in the Microsoft Management Console (MMC) GUI. Simply double-clicking a certificate file will usually put it in your user account’s Personal store, but that won’t work.
 With the certificate installed, you’ll need to create an HTTPS listener on the computer, telling it to use the newly installed certificate. The step-by-step directions are
quite extensive, and because this isn’t something a lot of people will probably do,
we’re not going to cover them all here. Take a look at Don’s Secrets of PowerShell Remoting guide (it’s free) and you’ll find step-by-step instructions including screenshots.

23.4.3 Mutual authentication via TrustedHosts
This is a slightly easier technique than using an SSL certificate, and it requires a lot less
setup. But it’s a bit more dangerous, because it basically shuts off mutual authentication for selected hosts. Before you try it, you need to be able to confidently state, “it is
unthinkable that someone could impersonate one of these hosts, or hack their DNS
records.” For internal computers on your intranet, for example, you might feel pretty
confident of that.

 Then you just need a way to identify the computers you’ll trust without mutual
authentication. In a domain, for example, that might be something like “*.COMPANY
.COM” for all hosts in the Company.com domain.

This is an instance where you’re likely going to want to configure the setting for
your entire domain, so we’ll give you the Group Policy instructions. You can use these
same instructions for a single computer’s Local Security Policy.
 In any GPO or in the Local Computer Policy editor, follow these steps:
1 Expand Computer Configuration.
2 Expand Administrative Templates.
3 Expand Windows Components.
4 Expand Windows Remote Management.
5 Expand WinRM Client.
6 Double-click Trusted Hosts.
7 Enable the policy and add your trusted hosts lists. Multiple entries can be separated by commas, such as “*.company.com,*.sales.company.com.”
NOTE Older versions of Windows might not have the template needed to display these settings in the Local Computer Policy, and older domain controllers might not have them in their Group Policy objects. For those situations,
you can change the Trusted Hosts list in PowerShell. Run help
about_remote_troubleshooting in the shell for instructions.
Now you’ll be able to connect to those machines without mutual authentication getting in the way. You must provide a -Credential parameter with all remoting commands used to connect to these computers—failure to do so will result in a failed
connection attempt.

23.5 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need a Windows 8 or Windows Server 2012 computer running PowerShell v3.
Create a remoting endpoint named TestPoint on your local computer. Configure the
endpoint so that the SmbShare module is loaded automatically, but so that only the
Get-SmbShare cmdlet is visible from that module. Also ensure that key cmdlets like
Exit-PSSession are available, but no other core PowerShell cmdlets can be used.
Don’t worry about specifying special endpoint permissions or designating a “run as”
credential.
 Test your endpoint by connecting to it using Enter-PSSession (specify localhost as
the computer name, and TestPoint as the configuration name). When connected, run
Get-Command to ensure that only the designated handful of commands can be seen.
 Note that this lab might only be possible on Windows 8, Windows Server 2012, and
later versions of Windows—the SmbShare module didn’t ship with earlier versions of
Windows.

