Using regular expressions
to parse text files
Regular expressions are one of those awkward topics. We often have students ask us
to explain them, only to realize—halfway through the conversation—that they
didn’t need regular expressions at all. A regex, as a regular expression is sometimes
known, is useful in text parsing, which is something you end up doing a lot in Unix
and Linux operating systems. In PowerShell, you tend to do less text parsing—and
we also find you tend to need regexes less often. That said, we certainly know of
times when, in PowerShell, you need to parse some textual content, such as an IIS
log file. That’s how we’ll be covering regular expressions in this chapter: as a tool to
parse text files.
 Don’t get us wrong: there’s much more you can do with regular expressions,
and we’ll cover a few of those at the end of this chapter. But to make sure you have
a good expectation up front, let’s be clear that we’re not going to try to cover regular expressions comprehensively or exhaustively in this book. Regular expressions
can get incredibly complicated. They’re an entire technology unto themselves. We’ll
get you started, and try to do so in a way that’s immediately applicable to many production environments, and then we’ll give you some pointers for digging deeper
on your own, if that’s your need.
 Our goal with this chapter is to introduce you to regex syntax in a simplified
fashion, and show you how PowerShell can use them. If you want to move on to
more complicated expressions on your own, you’re welcome to, and you’ll know
how to use those within the shell.


24.1 The purpose of regular expressions
A regular expression is written in a very specific language, and its purpose is to define
a text pattern. For example, an IPv4 address consists of one to three digits, a period,
one to three more digits, a period, and so forth. A regex can define that pattern,
although it would accept an invalid address like 211.193.299.299. That’s the difference
between recognizing a text pattern and actually checking for the validity of the data.
 One of the biggest uses of regular expressions—and the use we’ll be covering in
this chapter—is to detect specific text patterns within a larger text file, such as a log
file. For example, you might write a regex to look for the specific text that represents
an HTTP 500 error in a web server log file, or to look for email addresses in an SMTP
server log file. In addition to detecting the text pattern, you might use the regex to capture the matched text, enabling you to extract those email addresses from the log file.
24.2 A regex syntax primer
The simplest regex is an exact string of text that you want to match. “Don,” for example, is technically a regex, and in PowerShell it’ll match “DON,” “don,” “Don,” “DoN,”
and so on—PowerShell’s default matching is case-insensitive.
 Certain characters, however, have special meaning within a regex, and they enable
you to detect patterns of variable text. Here are some examples:
 \w matches “word characters,” which means letters, numbers, and underscores,
but no punctuation and no whitespace. The regex \won would match “Don”,
“Ron”, and “ton”, with the \w standing in for any single letter, number, or
underscore.
 \W matches the opposite of \w (so this is one example where PowerShell is sensitive to case), meaning it matches whitespace and punctuation—“non-word
characters,” in the parlance.
 \d matches any digit from 0 through 9 inclusive.
 \D matches any non-digit.
 \s matches any whitespace character, like a tab, space, or carriage return.
 \S matches any non-whitespace character.
 . (a period) stands in for any single character.
 [abcde] matches any character in that set. The regex d[aeiou]n would match
“don” and “dan” but not “doun” or “deen.”
 [a-z] matches one or more characters in that range. You can specify multiple
ranges as comma-separated lists, such as [a-f,m-z].
 [^abcde] matches one or more characters that are not in that set, meaning the
regex d[^aeiou] would match “dns” but not “don”.
 ? follows another literal or special character and matches exactly one instance
of that character. So, the regex do?n would match “don” but would not match
“doon”. It would also match “dn” because ? can also match zero instances of the
preceding character.

 * matches any number of instances of the preceding character. The regex do*n
would match both “doon” and “don”. It would also match “dn” because * also
matches zero instances of the preceding character.
 + matches one or more instances of the preceding character. You’ll see this used
a lot with parentheses, which create a sort of subexpression. For example, the
regex (dn)+o would match “dndndndno” because it matches repeating
instances of the “dn” subexpression.
 \ (backslash) is the regex escape character. Use it in front of a character that
normally has special meaning in the regex syntax, to make that character a literal. For example, the regex \. would match a literal period character, rather
than allowing the period to stand in for any single character, as it normally
does. To match a literal backslash, escape it with a backslash: \\.
 {2} matches exactly that many instances of the preceding character. For example, \d{1} matches exactly one digit. Use {2,} to match two or more, and use
{1,3} to match at least one, but no more than three.
 ^ matches the beginning of the string. For example, the regex d.n would match
“don” as well as “pteranodon”. But the regex ^d.n would match “don” but
would not match “pteranodon” because the ^ makes the matching occur at the
beginning of the string. This is a different use of ^ than in the previous example, where it was used with [square brackets] to indicate a negative match.
 $ matches the end of the string. For example, the regex .icks would match
“hicks” and “sticks” (the match would technically be on “ticks” in that example),
and would also match “Dickson”. But the regex .icks$ would not match “Dickson” because the $ indicates that the string should reach its end after the “s”.
There you have it—a whirlwind look at the basic regex syntax. As we wrote earlier,
there’s a lot more where that came from, but this will be enough to get some basic
work done. Let’s look at some example regular expressions:
 \d{1,3}\.\d{1,3}\.\d{1,3}\.\d{1,3} would match the pattern of an IPv4
address, although it’ll accept illegal data like “432.567.875.000” as well as legal
data like “192.169.15.12”.
 \\\\\w+(\\\w+)+ would match a Universal Naming Convention (UNC) path.
All the backslashes make that regex hard to read—which is one reason it’s
important to test and tweak your regular expressions before you rely on them in
a production task.
 \w{1}\.\w+@company\.com matches a specific type of email address: first initial,
a period, last name, and then “@company.com”. For example, “d.jones
@company.com” would be a valid match. You do have to be a bit careful with
these. For example, “donald.jones@company.com.org” would also be a valid
match. We boldfaced the portion of the string that the regex would match—
and the regex is fine with there being extra text before and after the matched
portion. That’s where the ^ and $ anchors come into play in many situations.


NOTE You’ll find more about basic regex syntax by running help
about_regular_expressions in PowerShell. At the end of this chapter, we’ll
provide some additional resources for further exploration.
24.3 Using regex with -Match
PowerShell includes a comparison operator, -Match, and a case-sensitive cousin,
-CMatch, that work with regular expressions. Here are some examples:
PS C:\> "don" -match "d[aeiou]n"
True
PS C:\> "dooon" -match "d[aeiou]n"
False
PS C:\> "dooon" -match "d[aeiou]+n"
True
PS C:\> "djinn" -match "d[aeiou]+n"
False
PS C:\> "dean" -match "d[aeiou]n"
False
Although it has many uses, we’re primarily going to rely on -Match to test regular
expressions and make sure they’re working properly. As you can see, its left-hand
operand is whatever string you’re testing, and the right-hand operand is the regular
expression. If there’s a match, it outputs True; if not, you get False.
TRY IT NOW This is a good time to take a break from reading and try using
the -Match operator. Run through some of the examples we gave you in the
syntax section earlier, and make sure you’re comfortable using the -Match
operator in the shell.
24.4 Using regex with Select-String
Now we reach the real meat of this chapter. We’re going to use some IIS log files as
examples, because they’re exactly the kind of pure-text file that a regex is designed to
deal with. It’d be nice if we could read these logs into PowerShell in a more objectoriented fashion but ... well, we can’t. So a regex it is.
TRY IT NOW If you’d like to follow along, we’ve zipped up our example log
files and made them available for download on http://MoreLunches.com.
Just look for this book’s web page and you’ll find the example IIS log files
available as a download. We saved the log files in C:\LogFiles for the examples
in this chapter; that folder contains three subfolders (WSSVC1, WSSVC2, and
WSSVC3), each of which contains one IIS log file.
Let’s start by scanning through the log files to look for any 40x errors. These are often
“file not found” and other errors, and we want to be able to generate a report of the
bad files for our organization’s web developers. The log files contain a single line for
each HTTP request, and each line is broken into space-delimited fields. We have some
files that contain “401” and so forth as part of their filename—e.g., “error401.html”—
and we don’t want those to be included in our results. We’ll specify a regex like


\s40[0-9]\s because that specifies a space on either side of the 40x error code. It
should find all errors from 400 through 409 inclusive. Here’s our command:
PS C:\logfiles> get-childitem -filter *.log -recurse | select-string -pattern
"\s40[0-9]\s" | format-table Filename,LineNumber,Line -wrap
Notice that we changed to the C:\LogFiles directory to run this command. We started
by asking PowerShell to get all files matching the *.log filename pattern, and to
recurse subdirectories. That will ensure that all three of our log files are included in
the output. Then we used Select-String, and gave it our regex as a pattern. The
result of the command is a MatchInfo object; we used Format-Table to create a display that includes the filename, the line number, and the line of text that contained
our match. This can be easily redirected to a file and given to our web developers.
 Next, we want to scan the files for all access by Gecko-based web browsers. Our
developers tell us they’ve been having some problems with customers accessing the
sites using those browsers, and they want to see which files in particular are being
requested. They think they’ve narrowed the problem down to browsers running
under Windows NT 6.2, meaning we’re looking for user-agent strings that look something like this:
(Windows+NT+6.2;+WOW64;+rv:11.0)+Gecko
Our developers have stressed that the 64-bit thing isn’t specific, so they don’t want the
log results limited to just “WOW64” user-agent strings. We came up with this regex:
6\.2;[\w\W]+\+Gecko—let’s break that down:
 6\.2;—This is “6.2;” and notice that we escaped the period to make it a literal
character rather than the single-character wildcard that a period normally
indicates.
 [\w\W]+—This is one or more word or non-word characters—in other words,
anything.
 \+Gecko—This is a literal +, then “Gecko”.
Here’s the command to find matching lines from the log files, along with the first couple lines of output:
PS C:\logfiles> get-childitem -filter *.log -recurse | select-string -pattern
"6\.2;[\w\W]+\+Gecko"
W3SVC1\u_ex120420.log:14:2012-04-20 21:45:04 10.211.55.30 GET /MyApp1/
Testpage.asp - 80 - 10.211.55.29 Mozilla/
5.0+(Windows+NT+6.2;+WOW64;+rv:11.0)+Gecko/20100101+Firefox/11.0 200 0 0
1125
W3SVC1\u_ex120420.log:15:2012-04-20 21:45:04 10.211.55.30 GET /TestPage.asp -
80 - 10.211.55.29 Mozilla/5.0+(Windows+NT+6.2;+WOW64;+rv:11.0)+Gecko/
20100101+Firefox/11.0 200 0 0 1 109
We left the output in its default format this time, rather than sending it to a format
cmdlet.


 As a final example, let’s turn from IIS log files to the Windows Security log. Event
log entries include a Message property, which contains detailed information about the
event. Unfortunately, this information is formatted for easy human reading, not for
easy computer-based parsing. We’d like to look for all events with ID 4624, which indicates an account logon (that number may differ between different versions of Windows; our example is from Windows Server 2008 R2). But we only want to see those
events related to logons for accounts starting with “WIN”, which relates to computer
accounts in our domain, and whose account names end in TM20$ through TM40$,
which are the specific computers we’re interested in. A regex for this might look
something like WIN[\W\w]+TM[234][0-9]\$—notice how we needed to escape the
final dollar sign so that it isn’t interpreted as an end-of-string anchor. We needed to
include [\W\w] (non-word and word characters) because it’s possible for our account
names to include a hyphen, which wouldn’t match the \w word character class. Here’s
our command:
PS C:\> get-eventlog -LogName security | where { $_.eventid -eq 4624 } |
select -ExpandProperty message | select-string -pattern
"WIN[\W\w]+TM[234][0-9]\$"
We started by using Where-Object to keep only events with ID 4624. We then
expanded the contents of the Message property into a plain string, and piped it to
Select-String. Note that this will output the matching message text; if our goal was
to output the entire matching event, we would have taken a different approach:
PS C:\> get-eventlog -LogName security | where { $_.eventid -eq 4624 -and
$_.message -match "WIN[\W\w]+TM[234][0-9]\$" }
Here, rather than outputting the contents of the Message property, we’ve simply looked
for records where the Message property contains text matching our regex—and then
output the entire event object. It’s all about what you’re after in terms of output.

24.5 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need any computer running PowerShell v3.
Make no mistake about it, regular expressions can make your head spin, so don’t try
to create complex regexes right off the bat—start simple. Here are a few exercises to
ease you into it. Use regular expressions and operators to complete the following:
1. Get all files in your Windows directory that have a two-digit number as part of the
name.
dir c:\windows | where {$_.name -match "\d{2}"}

 2.Find all processes running on your computer that are from Microsoft, and display
the process ID, name, and company name. Hint: pipe Get-Process to Get-Member to
discover property names.
get-process |where {$_.company -match "^Microsoft"} | Select-string "Start[\w+\W+"]+Agent: Installing Updates"
"
3. In the Windows Update log, usually found in C:\Windows, you want to display only
the lines where the agent began installing files. You may need to open the file in Notepad to figure out what string you need to select.
get-content C:\Windows\WindowsUpdate.log | Select-string "Start[\w+\W+]+Agent: Installing Updates"
4. Using the Get-DNSClientCache cmdlet, display all listings in which the Data property is a IPv4 address.
You could get by with a pattern that starts with one to three numbers follow by a literal period, like this:
get-dnsclientcache | where { $_.data -match "^\d(1,3)\."}
Or you could match an entire IPv4 address string:
get-dnsclientcache |where 
{ $_.data -match "^\d{1,3}\.\d{1.3}\.d{1,3}|/d{1,3}"}

24.6 Further exploration
You’ll find regular expressions used in other places in PowerShell, and many of them
involve shell elements that we don’t cover in this book. Here are some examples:
 The Switch scripting construct includes a parameter that lets it compare a
value to one or more regular expressions.
 Advanced scripts and functions (script cmdlets) can utilize a regular
expression-based input validation tool to help prevent invalid parameter values.
 The -Match operator (which we covered briefly in this chapter) tests for string
matches against a regular expression, and—something we didn’t share earlier—captures matched strings to an automatic $matches collection.
PowerShell utilizes industry-standard regex syntax, and if you’re interested in learning
more, we recommend Mastering Regular Expressions by Jeffrey E.F. Friedl (O’Reilly).
There are a gazillion other regex books out there, some of which are specific to Windows and .NET (and thus PowerShell), some of which focus on building a regex for
specific situations, and so forth. Browse your favorite online bookstore and see if there
are any books that look appealing to you and your specific needs.
 We also use a free online regex repository, http://RegExLib.com, which has
numerous regex examples for a variety of purposes (phone numbers, email addresses,
IP addresses, you name it). We’ve also found ourselves using http://RegExTester.com,
a website that lets you interactively test regular expressions to get them dialed in
exactly the way you need.
