Additional random tips, tricks, and techniques

We’re nearing the end of your “month of lunches,” and the next chapter is your final
exam, where you’ll tackle a complete administrative task from scratch. Before you
do, we’d like to share a few extra tips and techniques to round out your education.

25.1 Profiles, prompts, and colors: customizing the shell
Every PowerShell session starts out the same: the same aliases, the same PSDrives,
the same colors, and so forth. Why not make the shell a little bit more customized?
25.1.1 PowerShell profiles
We’ve explained before that there’s a difference between a PowerShell hosting
application and the PowerShell engine itself. A hosting application, such as the
console or the PowerShell ISE, is a way for you to send commands to the PowerShell
engine. The engine executes your commands, and the hosting application is
responsible for displaying the results. Another thing that the hosting application is
responsible for doing is loading and running profile scripts each time the shell starts.
 These profile scripts can be used to customize the PowerShell environment, by
loading snap-ins or modules, changing to a different starting directory, defining
functions that you’ll want to use, and so forth. For example, here is the profile
script that Don uses on his computer:
Import-Module ActiveDirectory
Add-PSSnapin SqlServerCmdletSnapin100
cd c:\

The profile loads the two shell extensions that Don uses the most, and it changes to
the root of his C: drive, which is where Don likes to begin working. You can put any
commands you like into your profile.
NOTE You might think there’s no need to load the ActiveDirectory module,
because PowerShell will implicitly load it as soon as Don tries to use one of
the commands in that module. But that particular module also maps an AD:
PSDrive, and Don likes to have that available as soon as the shell starts.
There’s no default profile, and the exact profile script that you create will depend a
bit upon how you want it to work. Details are available if you run help
about_profiles, but you mainly need to consider whether or not you’ll be working in
multiple different hosting applications. For example, we tend to switch back and forth
between the regular console and the PowerShell ISE, and we like to have the same
profile running for both, so we have to be careful to create the right profile script file
in the right location. We also have to be careful about what goes into that profile,
because we’re using it for both the console and the ISE—some commands that tweak
console-specific settings like colors can cause an error when run in the ISE.
 Here are the files that the console host tries to load, and the order in which it tries
to load them:
1 $pshome/profile.ps1—This will execute for all users of the computer, no matter which host they’re using (remember that $pshome is predefined within
PowerShell and contains the path of the PowerShell installation folder).
2 $pshome/Microsoft.PowerShell_profile.ps1—This will execute for all users of
the computer if they’re using the console host. If they’re using the PowerShell
ISE, the $pshome/Microsoft.PowerShellISE_profile.ps1 script will be executed
instead.
3 $home/Documents/WindowsPowerShell/profile.ps1—This will execute only
for the current user (because it lives under the user’s home directory), no matter which host they’re using.
4 $home/Documents/WindowsPowerShell/Microsoft.PowerShell_profile.ps1—
This will execute for the current user if they’re using the console host. If they’re
using the PowerShell ISE, the $home/Documents/WindowsPowerShell/
Microsoft.PowerShellISE_profile.ps1 script will be executed instead.
If one or more of these scripts doesn’t exist, there’s no problem. The hosting application will simply skip it and move on to the next one.
 On 64-bit systems, there are variations for both 32- and 64-bit scripts, because there
are separate 32- and 64-bit versions of PowerShell itself. You won’t always want the
same commands run in the 64-bit shell as you do in the 32-bit shell. By that we mean
that some modules and other extensions are only available for one or the other architecture, so you wouldn’t want a 32-bit profile trying to load a 64-bit module into the
32-bit shell, because it won’t work.
Licensed to <pedbro@gmail.com>
296 CHAPTER 25 Additional random tips, tricks, and techniques
 Note that the documentation in about_profiles is different from what we’ve
listed here, and our experience is that the preceding list is correct. Here are a few
more points about that list:
 $pshome is a built-in PowerShell variable that contains the installation folder for
PowerShell itself; on most systems, that’s in C:\Windows\System32\WindowsPowerShell\v1.0 (for the 64-bit version of the shell on a 64-bit system).
 $home is another built-in variable that points to the current user’s profile folder
(such as C:\Users\Administrator).
 We’ve used “Documents” to refer to the Documents folder, but on some versions of Windows it will be “My Documents”.
 We’ve written “no matter which host they’re using,” but that technically isn’t
true. It’s true of hosting applications (the console and the ISE) written by
Microsoft, but there’s no way to force the authors of non-Microsoft hosting
applications to follow these rules.
Because we want the same shell extensions to load whether we’re using the console host
or the ISE, we chose to customize $home\Documents\WindowsPowerShell\profile.ps1,
because that profile is run for both of the Microsoft-supplied hosting applications.
TRY IT NOW Why don’t you try creating one or more profile scripts for yourself? Even if all you put in them is a simple message, such as Write "It
Worked", this is a good way to see the different files in action. Remember that
you have to close the shell (or ISE) and re-open it to see the profile scripts run.
Keep in mind that profile scripts are scripts and are subject to your shell’s current execution policy. If your execution policy is Restricted, your profile won’t run; if your
policy is AllSigned, your profile must be signed. Chapter 17 discussed the execution
policy and script signing.
25.1.2 Customizing the prompt
The PowerShell prompt—the PS C:\> that you’ve seen through much of this book—
is generated by a built-in function called Prompt. If you want to customize the prompt,
you can simply replace that function. Defining a new Prompt function is something
that can be done in a profile script, so that your change takes effect each time you
open the shell.
 Here’s the default prompt:
function prompt
{
 $(if (test-path variable:/PSDebugContext) { '[DBG]: ' }
 else { '' }) + 'PS ' + $(Get-Location) `
 + $(if ($nestedpromptlevel -ge 1) { '>>' }) + '> '
}
This prompt first tests to see if the $DebugContext variable is defined in the shell’s
VARIABLE: drive. If it is, this function adds [DBG]: to the start of the prompt. Otherwise, the prompt is defined as PS along with the current location, which is returned by


the Get-Location cmdlet. If the shell is in a nested prompt, as defined by the built-in
$nestedpromptlevel variable, the prompt will have >> added to it.
 Here is an alternative prompt function. You could enter this directly into any profile script to make it the standard prompt for your shell sessions.
function prompt {
 $time = (Get-Date).ToShortTimeString()
 "$time [$env:COMPUTERNAME]:> "
}
This alternative prompt displays the current time, followed by the current computer
name (which will be contained within square brackets).
6:07 PM [CLIENT01]:>
Note that this leverages PowerShell’s special behavior with double quotation marks, in
which the shell will replace variables (like $time) with their contents.
25.1.3 Tweaking colors
In previous chapters, we’ve mentioned how stressed-out we can get when a long series
of error messages scrolls by in the shell. Don always struggled in English class when he
was a kid, and seeing all that red text reminds him of the essays he’d get back from Ms.
Hansen, all marked up with a red pen. Yuck. Fortunately, PowerShell gives you the
ability to modify most of the default colors it uses.
 The default text foreground and background colors can be modified by clicking
on the control box in the upper-left corner of PowerShell’s window. From there, select
Properties, and then select the Colors tab, which is shown in figure 25.1.
Figure 25.1 Configuring the
default shell screen colors


 Modifying the colors of errors, warnings, and other messages is a bit trickier and
requires you to run a command. But you could put this command into your profile, so
that it executes each time you open the shell. Here’s how to change the error message
foreground color to green, which we find a lot more soothing:
(Get-Host).PrivateData.ErrorForegroundColor = "green"
 You can change colors for the following settings:
 ErrorForegroundColor
 ErrorBackgroundColor
 WarningForegroundColor
 WarningBackgroundColor
 DebugForegroundColor
 DebugBackgroundColor
 VerboseForegroundColor
 VerboseBackgroundColor
 ProgressForegroundColor
 ProgressBackgroundColor
And here are some of the colors you can choose:
 Red
 Yellow
 Black
 White
 Green
 Cyan
 Magenta
 Blue
There are also dark versions of most of these colors: DarkRed, DarkYellow, DarkGreen,
DarkCyan, DarkBlue, and so on.
25.2 Operators: -as, -is, -replace, -join, -split, -in, -contains
These additional operators are useful in a variety of situations. They let you work with
data types, collections, and strings.
25.2.1 -as and -is
The -as operator produces a new object in an attempt to convert an existing object
into a different type. For example, if you have a number that contains a decimal (perhaps from the result of a division operation), you can drop the decimal portion by
converting, or casting, the number to an integer:
1000 / 3 -as [int]


The object to be converted comes first, then the -as operator, and then, in square
brackets, the type you want to convert to. Types can include [string], [xml], [int],
[single], [double], [datetime], and others, although those are probably the ones
you’ll use the most. Technically, this example of converting to an integer will round
the fractional number to an integer, rather than just truncating the fractional portion
of the number.
 The -is operator works similarly: it’s designed to return True or False if an object
is of a particular type or not. Here are a few one-line examples:
123.45 -is [int]
"SERVER-R2" -is [string]
$True -is [bool]
(Get-Date) -is [datetime]
TRY IT NOW Try running each of these one-line commands in the shell to see
the results.
25.2.2 -replace
The -replace operator is designed to locate all occurrences of one string within
another and replace those occurrences with a third string:
PS C:\> "192.168.34.12" -replace "34","15"
192.168.15.12
The source string comes first, followed by the -replace operator. Then you provide
the string you want to search for within the source, followed by a comma and the
string you want to use in place of the search string. In the preceding example, we
replaced “34” with “15”.
25.2.3 -join and -split
The -join and -split operators are designed to convert arrays to delimited lists and
vice versa.
 For example, suppose you created an array with five elements:
PS C:\> $array = "one","two","three","four","five"
PS C:\> $array
one
two
three
four
five
This works because PowerShell automatically treats a comma-separated list as an array.
Now, let’s say you want to join this array together into a pipe-delimited string—you
can do that with -join:
PS C:\> $array -join "|"
one|two|three|four|five


Saving that result into a variable will let you re-use it, or even pipe it out to a file:
PS C:\> $string = $array -join "|"
PS C:\> $string
one|two|three|four|five
PS C:\> $string | out-file data.dat
The -split operator does the opposite: it takes a delimited string and makes an array
from it. For example, suppose you have a tab-delimited file containing one line and
four columns. Displaying the contents of the file might look like this:
PS C:\> gc computers.tdf
Server1 Windows East Managed
Keep in mind that Gc is an alias for Get-Content.
 You can use the -split operator to break that into four individual array elements:
PS C:\> $array = (gc computers.tdf) -split "`t"
PS C:\> $array
Server1
Windows
East
Managed
Notice the use of the escape character, a backtick, and a “t” (`t) to define the tab
character. That had to be in double quotes so that the escape character would be
recognized.
 The resulting array has four elements, and you can access them individually by
using their index numbers:
PS C:\> $array[0]
Server1
25.2.4 -contains and -in
The -contains operator causes much confusion for PowerShell newcomers. You’ll see
folks try to do this:
PS C:\> 'this' -contains '*his*'
False
In fact, they meant to use the -like operator instead:
. PS C:\> 'this' -like '*his*'
True
The -like operator is designed to do wildcard string comparisons. The -contains
operator is used to test whether or not a given object exists within a collection. For
example, create a collection of string objects, and then test to see if a given string is in
that collection:
PS C:\> $collection = 'abc','def','ghi','jkl'
PS C:\> $collection -contains 'abc'
True
PS C:\> $collection -contains 'xyz'
False


The -in operator does the same thing, but it flips the order of the operands so that
the collection goes on the right, and the test object on the left:
PS C:\> $collection = 'abc','def','ghi','jkl'
PS C:\> 'abc' -in $collection
True
PS C:\> 'xyz' -in $collection
False

25.3 String manipulation
Suppose you have a string of text, and you need to convert it to all uppercase letters. Or
perhaps you need to get the last three characters from the string. How would you do it?
 In PowerShell, strings are objects, and they come with a great many methods.
Remember that a method is simply a way of telling the object to do something, usually
to itself, and that you can discover the available methods by piping the object to Gm:
PS C:\> "Hello" | gm
 TypeName: System.String
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
Clone Method System.Object Clone()
CompareTo Method int CompareTo(System.Object value...
Contains Method bool Contains(string value)
CopyTo Method System.Void CopyTo(int sourceInde...
EndsWith Method bool EndsWith(string value), bool...
Equals Method bool Equals(System.Object obj), b...
GetEnumerator Method System.CharEnumerator GetEnumerat...
GetHashCode Method int GetHashCode()
GetType Method type GetType()
GetTypeCode Method System.TypeCode GetTypeCode()
IndexOf Method int IndexOf(char value), int Inde...
IndexOfAny Method int IndexOfAny(char[] anyOf), int...
Insert Method string Insert(int startIndex, str...
IsNormalized Method bool IsNormalized(), bool IsNorma...
LastIndexOf Method int LastIndexOf(char value), int ...
LastIndexOfAny Method int LastIndexOfAny(char[] anyOf),...
Normalize Method string Normalize(), string Normal...
PadLeft Method string PadLeft(int totalWidth), s...
PadRight Method string PadRight(int totalWidth), ...
Remove Method string Remove(int startIndex, int...
Replace Method string Replace(char oldChar, char...
Split Method string[] Split(Params char[] sepa...
StartsWith Method bool StartsWith(string value), bo...
Substring Method string Substring(int startIndex),...
ToCharArray Method char[] ToCharArray(), char[] ToCh...
ToLower Method string ToLower(), string ToLower(...
ToLowerInvariant Method string ToLowerInvariant()
ToString Method string ToString(), string ToStrin...
ToUpper Method string ToUpper(), string ToUpper(...
ToUpperInvariant Method string ToUpperInvariant()
Trim Method string Trim(Params char[] trimCha...
TrimEnd Method string TrimEnd(Params char[] trim...
TrimStart Method string TrimStart(Params char[] tr...


Chars ParameterizedProperty char Chars(int index) {get;}
Length Property System.Int32 Length {get;}
Some of the more useful String methods include the following:
 IndexOf() tells you the location of a given character within the string.
PS C:\> "SERVER-R2".IndexOf("-")
6
 Split(), Join(), and Replace() operate similarly to the -split, -join, and
-replace operators we described in the previous section. We tend to use the
PowerShell operators rather than the String methods.
 ToLower() and ToUpper() convert the case of a string.
PS C:\> $computername = "SERVER17"
PS C:\> $computername.tolower()
server17
 Trim() removes whitespace from both ends of a string; TrimStart() and
TrimEnd() remove whitespace from the beginning or end of a string respectively.
PS C:\> $username = " Don "
PS C:\> $username.Trim()
Don
All of these String methods are great ways to manipulate and modify String objects.
Note that all of these methods can be used with a variable that contains a string (as in
the ToLower() and Trim() examples), or they can be used directly with a static string
(as in the IndexOf() example).
25.4 Date manipulation
Like String objects, Date (or DateTime, if you prefer) objects come with a great many
methods that allow date and time manipulation and calculation:
PS C:\> get-date | gm
 TypeName: System.DateTime
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
Add Method System.DateTime Add(System.TimeSpan ...
AddDays Method System.DateTime AddDays(double value)
AddHours Method System.DateTime AddHours(double value)
AddMilliseconds Method System.DateTime AddMilliseconds(doub...
AddMinutes Method System.DateTime AddMinutes(double va...
AddMonths Method System.DateTime AddMonths(int months)
AddSeconds Method System.DateTime AddSeconds(double va...
AddTicks Method System.DateTime AddTicks(long value)
AddYears Method System.DateTime AddYears(int value)
CompareTo Method int CompareTo(System.Object value), ...
Equals Method bool Equals(System.Object value), bo...
GetDateTimeFormats Method string[] GetDateTimeFormats(), strin...
GetHashCode Method int GetHashCode()
GetType Method type GetType()
GetTypeCode Method System.TypeCode GetTypeCode()
IsDaylightSavingTime Method bool IsDaylightSavingTime()
Subtract Method System.TimeSpan Subtract(System.Date...
ToBinary Method long ToBinary()
ToFileTime Method long ToFileTime()
ToFileTimeUtc Method long ToFileTimeUtc()
ToLocalTime Method System.DateTime ToLocalTime()
ToLongDateString Method string ToLongDateString()
ToLongTimeString Method string ToLongTimeString()
ToOADate Method double ToOADate()
ToShortDateString Method string ToShortDateString()
ToShortTimeString Method string ToShortTimeString()
ToString Method string ToString(), string ToString(s...
ToUniversalTime Method System.DateTime ToUniversalTime()
DisplayHint NoteProperty Microsoft.PowerShell.Commands.Displa...
Date Property System.DateTime Date {get;}
Day Property System.Int32 Day {get;}
DayOfWeek Property System.DayOfWeek DayOfWeek {get;}
DayOfYear Property System.Int32 DayOfYear {get;}
Hour Property System.Int32 Hour {get;}
Kind Property System.DateTimeKind Kind {get;}
Millisecond Property System.Int32 Millisecond {get;}
Minute Property System.Int32 Minute {get;}
Month Property System.Int32 Month {get;}
Second Property System.Int32 Second {get;}
Ticks Property System.Int64 Ticks {get;}
TimeOfDay Property System.TimeSpan TimeOfDay {get;}
Year Property System.Int32 Year {get;}
DateTime ScriptProperty System.Object DateTime {get=if ((& {...
Note that the properties enable you to access just a portion of a DateTime, such as the
day, year, or month:
PS C:\> (get-date).month
10
The methods enable two things: calculations and conversions to other formats. For
example, to get the date for 90 days ago, we like to use AddDays() with a negative
number:
PS C:\> $today = get-date
PS C:\> $90daysago = $today.adddays(-90)
PS C:\> $90daysago
Saturday, July 24, 2012 11:26:08 AM
The methods whose names start with “To” are designed to provide dates and times in
an alternative format, such as a short date string:
PS C:\> $90daysago.toshortdatestring()
7/24/2012
These methods all use your computer’s current regional settings to determine the correct way of formatting dates and times.

25.5 Dealing with WMI dates
WMI tends to store date and time information in difficult-to-use strings. For example,
the Win32_OperatingSystem class tracks the last time a computer was started, and the
date and time information looks like this:
PS C:\> get-wmiobject win32_operatingsystem | select lastbootuptime
lastbootuptime
--------------
20101021210207.793534-420
PowerShell’s designers knew you wouldn’t be able to easily use this information, so
they added a pair of conversion methods to every WMI object. Pipe any WMI object to
Gm and you can see those methods at or near the end:
PS C:\> get-wmiobject win32_operatingsystem | gm
 TypeName: System.Management.ManagementObject#root\cimv2\Win32_OperatingS
ystem
Name MemberType Definition
---- ---------- ----------
Reboot Method System.Management...
SetDateTime Method System.Management...
Shutdown Method System.Management...
Win32Shutdown Method System.Management...
Win32ShutdownTracker Method System.Management...
BootDevice Property System.String Boo...
...
PSStatus PropertySet PSStatus {Status,...
ConvertFromDateTime ScriptMethod System.Object Con...
ConvertToDateTime ScriptMethod System.Object Con...
We’ve cut out most of the middle of this output so that you can easily find the
ConvertFromDateTime() and ConvertToDateTime() methods. In this case, what you
start with is a WMI date and time, and you want to convert to a normal date and time,
so you’d do it like this:
PS C:\> $os = get-wmiobject win32_operatingsystem
PS C:\> $os.ConvertToDateTime($os.lastbootuptime)
Thursday, October 20, 2011 9:02:07 PM
If you want to make that date and time information part of a normal table, you can use
Select-Object or Format-Table to create custom, calculated columns and properties:
PS C:\> get-wmiobject win32_operatingsystem | select BuildNumber,__SERVER,@{
l='LastBootTime';e={$_.ConvertToDateTime($_.LastBootupTime)}}
BuildNumber __SERVER LastBootTime
----------- -------- ------------
7600 SERVER-R2 10/20/2011 9:02:07 PM

25.6 Setting default parameter values
Most PowerShell commands have at least a few parameters that include default values. For example, run Dir by itself and it defaults to the current path, without you
having to specify a -Path parameter. In PowerShell v3, you can also define your own
defaults for any parameter on any command—or even on multiple commands. Your
defaults only apply when the command is run without the parameters you specify;
you can always override your defaults by specifying the parameter and values when
you run the command.
 Defaults are stored in a special built-in variable named $PSDefaultParameterValues.
The variable is empty each time you open a new shell window, and it’s meant to be populated with a hashtable (which you could do in a profile script, to have your defaults always
in effect).
 For example, let’s say you want to create a new credential object containing a username and password, and have that credential automatically apply to all commands
that have a -Credential parameter:
PS C:\> $credential = Get-Credential -UserName Administrator -Message "Ente
r Admin credential"
PS C:\> $PSDefaultParameterValues.Add('*:Credential',$credential)
Or, you might want to force only the Invoke-Command cmdlet to prompt for a credential each time it’s run. In this case, rather than assigning a default value, you’d assign a
script block that executes the Get-Credential command:
PS C:\> $PSDefaultParameterValues.Add('Invoke-Command:Credential',{Get-Cred
ential -Message 'Enter administrator credential' -UserName Administrator})
You can see that the basic format for the Add() method’s first argument is <cmdlet>
:<parameter>, and <cmdlet> can accept wildcards like *. The second argument for
the Add() method is either the value you want to make the default, or a script block
that executes some other command or commands.
 You can always examine $PSDefaultParameterValues to see what it contains:
PS C:\> $PSDefaultParameterValues
Name Value
---- -----
*:Credential System.Management.Automation.PSCredenti
Invoke-Command:Credential Get-Credential -Message 'Enter administ
Above and beyond
PowerShell variables are controlled by something called scope. We offered a brief
introduction to scope in chapter 21, and it is something that plays into these default
parameter values.


You can learn more about this feature by reading the shell’s about_parameters
_default_values help file.
25.7 Playing with script blocks
Script blocks are a key part of PowerShell, and you’ve been using them quite a bit:
 The -FilterScript parameter of Where-Object takes a script block.
 The -Process parameter of ForEach-Object takes a script block.
 The hashtable used to create custom properties with Select-Object, or custom
columns with Format-Table, accepts a script block as the value of the E or
Expression key.
 Default parameter values, as described in the previous section, can be set to a
script block.
 Some remoting and job-related commands, including Invoke-Command and
Start-Job, accept script blocks on their -ScriptBlock parameter.
So what is a script block? In general, it’s anything surrounded by {curly brackets}, with
the exception of hash tables, which use curly brackets but are preceded by the @ symbol. You can even enter a script block right from the command line and assign it to a
variable. You can then use the call operator, &, to run the block:
PS C:\> $block = {
>> get-process | sort -Property vm -Descending | select -first 10 }
>>
PS C:\> &$block
Handles NPM(K) PM(K) WS(K) VM(M) CPU(s) Id ProcessName
------- ------ ----- ----- ----- ------ -- -----------
 680 42 14772 13576 1387 3.84 404 svchost
 454 26 68368 75116 626 1.28 1912 powershell
 396 37 179136 99252 623 8.45 2700 powershell
 497 29 15104 6048 615 0.41 2500 SearchIndexer
 260 20 4088 8328 356 0.08 3044 taskhost
 550 47 16716 13180 344 1.25 1128 svchost
 1091 55 19712 35036 311 1.81 3056 explorer
 454 31 56660 15216 182 45.94 1596 MsMpEng
(continued)
If you set $PSDefaultParameterValues at the command line, it’ll apply to all
scripts and commands run within that shell session. But if you set
$PSDefaultParameterValues within a script, it’ll only apply to things done by that
script. That’s a useful technique, because it means you can start a script with a
bunch of defaults, and they won’t apply to other scripts, or to the shell in general.
This concept of “what happens in the script, stays in the script” is the heart of scope.
You can read more about scope in the shell’s about_scope help file, if you’d like to
explore further on your own.

 163 17 62808 27132 162 0.94 2692 dwm
 584 29 7752 8832 159 1.27 892 svchost
You can do quite a bit more with script blocks, and if you’d like to explore some of the
possibilities on your own, read the shell’s about_script_blocks help file.
25.8 More tips, tricks, and techniques
As we said at the outset of this chapter, this has been an overview of some random little things that we needed to show you, but that haven’t fit neatly into one of the previous chapters. Of course, you’ll continue to pick up little tips and tricks with the shell
as you learn more about it, and gain more experience with it.
 You can check out our Twitter feeds, too—@jeffhicks and @concentrateddon—
where we routinely share little tips and techniques that we discover and find useful.
Web sites like PowerShell.com also offer mailing lists that include regular tips. Sometimes, learning bit-by-bit can be an easy way to become more proficient in a technology, so consider these and any other sources you run across as a way to incrementally
and continually improve your PowerShell expertise.
