
Much as we hope you’ll be able to construct your own PowerShell commands and
scripts from scratch, we also realize that you’ll rely heavily on the internet for examples. Whether you’re repurposing examples from someone’s blog, or tweaking a
script you’ve found in an online script repository like the PowerShell Code Repository (http://PoshCode.org), being able to re-use someone else’s PowerShell script
is an important core skill. In this chapter, we’ll walk you through the process we use
to understand someone else’s script and make it our own

THANKS Credit goes to Christoph Tohermes and Kaia Taylor, who provided us with scripts to use in this chapter. We deliberately asked them for less-than-perfect scripts that don’t necessarily reflect all of the best practices we normally like to see. And in some instances we worsened their scripts to make this chapter a bit more real-world. We truly appreciate their contribution to this learning exercise!

Note that we’ve also selected these scripts specifically because they use some
advanced PowerShell features that we haven’t taught you. Again, we think that’s
realistic: you’re going to run across stuff that looks unfamiliar, and part of this exercise is about how to quickly figure out what the script is doing, even if you aren’t
fully trained on every technique the script uses.

26.1 The script
Listing 26.1 shows the complete script, which is entitled New-WebProject.ps1. This
script is designed to work with Microsoft’s IIS cmdlets, available in Windows Server
2008 R2 and later when the Web Services role is installed.

Listing 26.1 New-WebProject.ps1
param(
 [parameter(Mandatory = $true)]
 [string] $Path,
 [parameter(Mandatory = $true)]
 [string] $Name
 )
$System = [Environment]::GetFolderPath("System")
$script:hostsPath = ([System.IO.Path]::Combine($System, "drivers\etc\"))
➥+"hosts"
function New-localWebsite([string] $sitePath, [string] $siteName)
{
 try
 {
 Import-Module WebAdministration
 }
 catch
 {
 Write-Host "IIS Powershell module is not installed. Please install it
➥ first, by adding the feature"
 }
 Write-Host "AppPool is created with name: " $siteName
 New-WebAppPool -Name $siteName
 Set-ItemProperty IIS:\AppPools\$Name managedRuntimeVersion v4.0
 Write-Host
 if(-not (Test-Path $sitePath))
 {
 New-Item -ItemType Directory $sitePath
 }
 $header = "www."+$siteName+".local"
 $value = "127.0.0.1 " + $header
 New-Website -ApplicationPool $siteName -Name $siteName -Port 80
➥ -PhysicalPath $sitePath -HostHeader ($header)
 Start-Website -Name $siteName
 if(-not (HostsFileContainsEntry($header)))
 {
 AddEntryToHosts -hostEntry $value
 }
}
function AddEntryToHosts([string] $hostEntry)
{
 try
 {
 $writer = New-Object System.IO.StreamWriter($hostsPath, $true)
 $writer.Write([Environment]::NewLine)
 $writer.Write($hostEntry)
Listing 26.1 New-WebProject.ps1

 $writer.Dispose()
 }
 catch [System.Exception]
 {
 Write-Error "An Error occured while writing the hosts file"
 }
}
function HostsFileContainsEntry([string] $entry)
{
 try
 {
 $reader = New-Object System.IO.StreamReader($hostsPath + "hosts")
 while(-not($reader.EndOfStream))
 {
 $line = $reader.Readline()
 if($line.Contains($entry))
 {
 return $true
 }
 }
 return $false
 }
 catch [System.Exception]
 {
 Write-Error "An Error occured while reading the host file"
 }
}

First up is a parameter block, which you learned to create in chapter 21:

param(
 [parameter(Mandatory = $true)]
 [string] $Path,
 [parameter(Mandatory = $true)]
 [string] $Name
 )
 
This parameter block looks a bit different, but it appears to be defining a -Path and a
-Name parameter, each of which is mandatory. Fair enough. When you run this, you’ll
need to provide both pieces of information.

 The next couple of lines are a bit more mysterious:
$System = [Environment]::GetFolderPath("System")
$script:hostsPath = ([System.IO.Path]::Combine($System, "drivers\etc\"))
➥+"hosts"

These don’t look like they’re doing anything potentially dangerous—words like
GetFolderPath don’t cause us any alarm. To see what these do, we’ll just run them
right in the shell.

PS C:\> $system = [Environment]::GetFolderPath('System')
PS C:\> $system
C:\Windows\system32
PS C:\> $script:hostsPath = ([System.IO.Path]::Combine($system,"drivers\etc

\"))+"hosts"
PS C:\> $hostsPath
C:\Windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts
PS C:\>

The $script:hostsPath code is creating a new variable, so you’ve got that in addition
to the new $system variable. These two lines are just setting up a folder path and file
path. Make a note of these variables’ contents so that you can refer back to them as
you progress through the script.

 The remainder of the script consists of three functions: New-LocalWebsite,
AddEntryToHosts, and HostsFileContainsEntry. A function is like a script within a
script: each one represents some packaged bit of functionality that you can call on.
You can see that each one defines one or more input parameters, although they don’t
do so in a Param() block. Instead, they use an alternative parameter declaration technique that’s only legal for functions: listing the parameters in parentheses (the same
as a Param block) just after the function’s name. It’s kind of a shortcut.

 If you scan through the script, you won’t see any of these functions being called from
the script itself, so if you were to run this script as-is, nothing would happen. But inside
the New-LocalWebsite function, you can see where the HostsFileContainsEntry function is being called:
if(-not (HostsFileContainsEntry($header)))
 {
 AddEntryToHosts -hostEntry $value
 }
You can also see where AddEntryToHosts is being called by this code. It’s all in an If
construct. In the shell, you can run help *if* to learn more:
PS C:\> help *if*
Name Category Module
---- -------- ------
diff Alias
New-ModuleManifest Cmdlet Microsoft.PowerShell.Core
Test-ModuleManifest Cmdlet Microsoft.PowerShell.Core
Get-AppxPackageManifest Function Appx
Get-PfxCertificate Cmdlet Microsoft.PowerShell.S...
Export-Certificate Cmdlet PKI
Export-PfxCertificate Cmdlet PKI
Get-Certificate Cmdlet PKI
Get-CertificateNotificationTask Cmdlet PKI
Import-Certificate Cmdlet PKI
Import-PfxCertificate Cmdlet PKI
New-CertificateNotificationTask Cmdlet PKI
New-SelfSignedCertificate Cmdlet PKI
Remove-CertificateNotification... Cmdlet PKI
Switch-Certificate Cmdlet PKI
Test-Certificate Cmdlet PKI
about_If HelpFile

Help files are usually listed last, and there’s one for about_If. Reading through it,
you can learn a bit about how this construct works. In the context of our example
script, this is checking to see if HostsFileContainsEntry returns True or False; if it’s
False, the AddEntryToHosts function is called. This structure suggests that
New-LocalWebsite is the “main” function in this script, or the function you’d want to
run to make something happen. HostsFileContainsEntry and AddEntryToHosts
seem to be utility functions that are called upon as needed by New-LocalWebsite. Let’s
focus on New-LocalWebsite:
function New-localWebsite([string] $sitePath, [string] $siteName)
{
 try
 {
 Import-Module WebAdministration
 }
 catch
 {
 Write-Host "IIS Powershell module is not installed. Please install it
➥ first, by adding the feature"
 }
 Write-Host "AppPool is created with name: " $siteName
 New-WebAppPool -Name $siteName
 Set-ItemProperty IIS:\AppPools\$Name managedRuntimeVersion v4.0
 Write-Host
 if(-not (Test-Path $sitePath))
 {
 New-Item -ItemType Directory $sitePath
 }
 $header = "www."+$siteName+".local"
 $value = "127.0.0.1 " + $header
 New-Website -ApplicationPool $siteName -Name $siteName -Port 80
➥ -PhysicalPath $sitePath -HostHeader ($header)
 Start-Website -Name $siteName
 if(-not (HostsFileContainsEntry($header)))
 {
 AddEntryToHosts -hostEntry $value
 }
}
You might not understand that Try construct. A quick search of help (help *try*)
reveals the about_try_catch_finally help file, which explains that everything in the
Try portion might cause an error. If it does, then the catch portion should execute.
Okay, that means the function is going to try to load the WebAdministration module,
and if that doesn’t work it’ll display an error message. Frankly, we think it should probably just exit the function entirely if an error occurs, but it doesn’t do that, so if
WebAdministration doesn’t load, you can expect to see more errors. You should make
sure WebAdministration is available before running this!
 The Write-Host stuff is useful for helping you track the progress of the script. The
next command is New-WebAppPool. Searching help reveals it to be part of the

WebAdministration module, and the command’s help file explains what it does. Next,
Set-ItemProperty seems to be setting something in the AppPool that was just created.
 The plain Write-Host command seems to be there just to put a blank line on the
screen. Okay, that’s fine. If you look up Test-Path, you’ll see that it tests whether a
given path, in this case a folder, exists. If not, the script uses New-Item to create that
folder.
 A variable, $header, is created that turns the $siteName parameter into something
like “www.sitename.local,” and the $value variable is created to add an IP address.
Then the New-WebSite command is run with a variety of parameters—you can read
the help on that command to figure out what each parameter does.
 Finally, the Start-WebSite command runs. The help file says that will get the website up and running. That’s when you get to the HostsFileContainsEntry and
AddEntryToHosts commands. Those appear to make sure the new website, as listed
in the $value variable, is put into the computer’s local HOSTS IP address-to-name
lookup file.


26.2 It’s a line-by-line examination
The process in the previous section is a line-by-line analysis of the script, and that’s the
process we suggest you follow. As you progress through each line:
 Identify variables, try to figure out what they’ll contain, and write that down on
a piece of paper. Because variables are often passed to command parameters,
having a handy reference of what you think each variable contains will help you
predict what each command will do.
 When you run across new commands, read their help and try to understand
what they’re doing. For Get- commands, try running them—plugging in any
values that the script passes in variables to parameters—to see what output is
produced.
 When you run across unfamiliar elements, like if or [environment], consider
running short code snippets inside a virtual machine to see what those snippets
do (using a VM helps protect your production environment). Search for those
keywords in help (using wildcards) to learn more.
Above all, don’t skip a single line. Don’t think to yourself, “Well, I don’t know what
that does, so I’ll just keep going.” Stop and find out what each line does, or what you
think it’ll do. That’ll let you figure out where you need to tweak the script to meet
your specific needs.


26.3 Lab
NOTE For this lab, you’ll need any computer running PowerShell v3.
Listing 26.2 shows a complete script. See if you can figure out what it does, and how to
use it. Can you predict any errors that this might cause? What might you need to do in
order to use this in your environment?

 Note that this script should run as-is, but if it doesn’t on your system, do you think
you can track down the cause of the problem? Keep in mind that you’ve seen most of
these commands, and for the ones you haven’t there are the PowerShell help files.
Those files’ examples include every technique shown in this script.

Listing 26.2 Get-LastOn.ps1
function get-LastOn {
<#
.DESCRIPTION
Tell me the most recent event log entries for logon or logoff.
.BUGS
Blank 'computer' column
.EXAMPLE
get-LastOn -computername server1 | Sort-Object time -Descending |
Sort-Object id -unique | format-table -AutoSize -Wrap
ID Domain Computer Time
-- ------ -------- ----
LOCAL SERVICE NT AUTHORITY 4/3/2012 11:16:39 AM
NETWORK SERVICE NT AUTHORITY 4/3/2012 11:16:39 AM
SYSTEM NT AUTHORITY 4/3/2012 11:16:02 AM
Sorting -unique will ensure only one line per user ID, the most recent.
Needs more testing
.EXAMPLE
PS C:\Users\administrator> get-LastOn -computername server1 -newest 10000
 -maxIDs 10000 | Sort-Object time -Descending |
 Sort-Object id -unique | format-table -AutoSize -Wrap
ID Domain Computer Time
-- ------ -------- ----
Administrator USS 4/11/2012 10:44:57 PM
ANONYMOUS LOGON NT AUTHORITY 4/3/2012 8:19:07 AM
LOCAL SERVICE NT AUTHORITY 10/19/2011 10:17:22 AM
NETWORK SERVICE NT AUTHORITY 4/4/2012 8:24:09 AM
student WIN7 4/11/2012 4:16:55 PM
SYSTEM NT AUTHORITY 10/18/2011 7:53:56 PM
USSDC$ USS 4/11/2012 9:38:05 AM
WIN7$ USS 10/19/2011 3:25:30 AM
PS C:\Users\administrator>
.EXAMPLE
get-LastOn -newest 1000 -maxIDs 20
Only examines the last 1000 lines of the event log
.EXAMPLE
get-LastOn -computername server1| Sort-Object time -Descending |
Sort-Object id -unique | format-table -AutoSize -Wrap
#>
param (
 [string]$ComputerName = 'localhost',
 [int]$Newest = 5000,
 [int]$maxIDs = 5,
 [int]$logonEventNum = 4624,
Listing 26.2 Get-LastOn.ps1

 [int]$logoffEventNum = 4647
 )
 $eventsAndIDs = Get-EventLog -LogName security -Newest $Newest |
 Where-Object {$_.instanceid -eq $logonEventNum -or
➥$_.instanceid -eq $logoffEventNum} |
 Select-Object -Last $maxIDs
➥-Property TimeGenerated,Message,ComputerName
 foreach ($event in $eventsAndIDs) {
 $id = ($event |
 parseEventLogMessage |
 where-Object {$_.fieldName -eq "Account Name"} |
 Select-Object -last 1).fieldValue
 $domain = ($event |
 parseEventLogMessage |
 where-Object {$_.fieldName -eq "Account Domain"} |
 Select-Object -last 1).fieldValue
 $props = @{'Time'=$event.TimeGenerated;
 'Computer'=$ComputerName;
 'ID'=$id
 'Domain'=$domain}
 $output_obj = New-Object -TypeName PSObject -Property $props
 write-output $output_obj
 }
}
function parseEventLogMessage()
{
 [CmdletBinding()]
 param (
 [parameter(ValueFromPipeline=$True,Mandatory=$True)]
 [string]$Message
 )
 $eachLineArray = $Message -split "`n"
 foreach ($oneLine in $eachLineArray) {
 write-verbose "line:_$oneLine_"
 $fieldName,$fieldValue = $oneLine -split ":", 2
 try {
 $fieldName = $fieldName.trim()
 $fieldValue = $fieldValue.trim()
 }
 catch {
 $fieldName = ""
 }
 if ($fieldName -ne "" -and $fieldValue -ne "" )
 {
 $props = @{'fieldName'="$fieldName";
 'fieldValue'=$fieldValue}
 $output_obj = New-Object -TypeName PSObject -Property $props
 Write-Output $output_obj
 }
 }
}
Get-LastOn
