Never the end
We’ve nearly come to the end of this book, but it’s hardly the end of your PowerShell exploration. There’s a lot more in the shell to learn, and based on what you’ve learned in this book, you’ll be able to teach yourself much of it. This short
chapter will help point you in the right directions.

27.1 Ideas for further exploration
This book has really focused on the skills and techniques that you need to be an
effective PowerShell tool user. In other words, you should be able to start accomplishing tasks using all of the thousands of commands that are available for PowerShell,
whether your needs relate to Windows, Exchange, SharePoint, or something else.
 Your next step would be to start combining commands to create automated,
multistep processes, and to do so in a way that produces packaged, ready-to-use
tools for other people. We call that toolmaking, and it’ll be the topic of its own complete book. But even with what you’ve learned in this book, you can produce
parameterized scripts that contain as many commands as you need to complete a
task—that’s the very beginning of toolmaking.
 What else does toolmaking involve?
 PowerShell’s simplified scripting language
 Scope
 Functions, and the ability to build multiple tools into a single script file
 Error handling
 Writing help
 Debugging

 Custom formatting views
 Custom type extensions
 Script and manifest modules
 Using databases
 Workflows
 Pipeline troubleshooting
 Complex object hierarchies
 Globalization and localization
 GUI-based PowerShell tools
 Proxy functions
 Constrained remoting and delegated administration
 Using .NET
There’s lots more, too. If you get interested enough and have the right background
skills, you may even be a part of PowerShell’s third audience: software developers.
There’s a whole set of techniques and technologies around developing for PowerShell, using PowerShell during development, and more. It’s a big product!
27.2 “Now that I’ve read the book, where do I start?”
The best thing to do now is to pick a task. Choose something in your production
world that you personally find repetitive, and automate it using the shell. You’ll almost
certainly run across things that you don’t know how to do, and that’s the perfect place
to start learning.
 Here are some of the things we’ve seen other administrators tackle:
 Write a script that changes the password a service uses to log in, and have it target multiple computers that are running that service. (You could do this in a
single command.)
 Write a script that automates new user provisioning, including creating user
accounts, mailboxes, and home directories. Setting NTFS permissions with
PowerShell is tricky, but consider using a tool like Cacls.exe or Xcacls.exe from
within your PowerShell script, instead of PowerShell’s native (and complex)
Get-ACL and Set-ACL cmdlets.
 Write a script that manages Exchange mailboxes in some way—perhaps getting
reports on the largest mailboxes, or creating charge-back reports based on mailbox sizes.
 Automate the provisioning of new websites in IIS, using the WebAdministration
module included in Windows Server 2008 R2 and later (which also works with
IIS 7 in Windows Server 2008).
The biggest thing to remember is to not overthink it. Don once met an administrator
who struggled for weeks to write a robust file-copying script in PowerShell so that he
could deploy content across a web server farm. “Why not just use Xcopy or Robocopy?” Don asked. The administrator stared at Don for a minute, and then laughed.

He’d gotten so wrapped up in “doing it in PowerShell” that he forgot that PowerShell
can use all of the excellent utilities that are already out there.
27.3 Other resources you’ll grow to love
We spend a lot of time working with, writing about, and teaching PowerShell. Ask our
families—sometimes we barely shut up about it long enough to eat dinner. That
means we’ve accumulated a lot of online resources that we use daily, and that we recommend to all of our students. Hopefully they’ll provide you with a good starting
point as well.
 MoreLunches.com—This should be your first stop, if you haven’t already bookmarked it. There you’ll find free bonus and companion content for this book,
including the lab answers, video demonstrations, bonus articles, and additional
recommended resources. You’ll also be able to download the longer code listings
for this book so that you don’t have to type them in manually. Consider bookmarking the site and visiting often to refresh what you’ve learned in this book.
 http://powershell.com/cs/blogs/donjones/default.aspx—This is Don’s PowerShell blog, on the community site Powershell.com
 http://jdhitsolutions.com/blog—This is Jeff’s all-purpose scripting and PowerShell blog.
 http://mcpmag.com/Articles/List/Prof-Powershell.aspx—This is Jeff’s “Prof.
PowerShell” weekly column for MCPMag.com, full of brief lessons and tips.
 http://bit.ly/AskDon—This is a public discussion forum where we answer questions directly. You’ll need to register for an account, but once you do, you’re
welcome to post your PowerShell questions, and we’ll do our best to answer.
There are also dedicated forums for many domain-specific topics like
Exchange, Active Directory, and more, and you should take advantage of the
experts who moderate those forums.
 http://ShellHub.com—This is a website that Don maintains. It’s a handpicked
list of other PowerShell-related online resources, including the blogs we read
most, third-party PowerShell tools, and more. Pretty much every URL we’ve ever
recommended to someone is listed here. In the event that any other URL we
give you changes, you can hop on ShellHub.com to find an update.
Students often ask if there are any other PowerShell books that we recommend. There
are only a few that we keep right on our desks, all of which are listed on http://PowerShellBooks.com, which is kept updated as new books come out. Two of those—Learn
PowerShell Toolmaking in a Month of Lunches and PowerShell in Depth (both available from
Manning)—are books we’ve authored or coauthored, so if you liked this book those
ones will probably work well for you also.
 Finally, if you’d like some full-length video-based training for PowerShell, visit
http://videotraining.interfacett.com for full-length, studio-quality offerings from Don
and other PowerShell experts. Keep in mind, though, that MoreLunches.com also
hosts free companion video content for each chapter in this book.
