
PowerShell cheat sheet
This is our opportunity to assemble a lot of the little gotchas into a single place. If
you’re ever having trouble remembering what something is or does, flip to this
chapter first.
28.1 Punctuation
There’s no doubt that PowerShell is full of punctuation, and much of it has a different meaning in the help files than it does in the shell itself. Here’s what it all means
within the shell:
 `(backtick)—This is PowerShell’s escape character. It removes the special
meaning of any character that follows it. For example, a space is normally a
separator, which is why cd c:\Program Files generates an error. Escaping
the space, cd c:\Program` Files, removes that special meaning and forces
the space to be treated as a literal, so the command works.
 ~(tilde)—When used as part of a path, this represents the current user’s
home directory, as defined in the UserProfile environment variable.
 ( )(parentheses)—These are used in a couple of ways:
– Just as in math, parentheses define an order of execution. PowerShell will
execute parenthetical commands first, from the innermost parentheses to
the outermost. This is a good way to run a command and have its output
feed the parameter of another command: Get-Service -computerName
(Get-Content c:\computernames.txt).

– Parentheses also enclose the parameters of a method, and they must be
included even if the method doesn’t require any parameters:
Change-Start-Mode('Automatic'), for example, or Delete().
 [ ](square brackets)—These have two main uses in the shell:
– They contain the index number when you want to refer to a single object
within an array or collection: $services[2] gets the third object from
$services (indexes are always zero-based).
– They contain a data type when you’re casting a piece of data as a specific
type. For example, $myresult / 3 -as [int] casts the result as a whole number (integer), and [xml]$data = Get-Content data.xml will read the contents of Data.xml and attempt to parse it as a valid XML document.
 { } (curly braces or curly brackets)—These have three uses:
– They contain blocks of executable code or commands, called script blocks.
These are often fed to parameters that expect a script block or a filter block:
Get-Service | Where-Object { $_.Status -eq 'Running' }.
– They contain the key-value pairs that make up a new hashtable. The opening
brace is always preceded by an @ sign. In the following example, we’re using
braces both to enclose the hashtable key-value pairs (of which there are two)
and to enclose an expression script block, which is the value for the second
key, e: $hashtable = @{l='Label';e={expression}}.
– When a variable name contains spaces or other characters normally illegal in
a variable name, braces must surround the name: ${My Variable}.
 ' '(single quotation marks)—These contain string values. PowerShell doesn’t
look for the escape character, nor does it look for variables, inside single
quotes.
 " "(double quotation marks)—These contain string values. PowerShell looks
for escape characters and the $ character inside double quotes. Escape characters are processed, and the characters following a $ symbol (up to the next
whitespace) are taken as a variable name and the contents of that variable are
substituted. For example, if the variable $one contains the value World, then
$two = "Hello $one `n" will contain Hello World and a carriage return (`n is a
carriage return).
 $(dollar sign)—This character tells the shell that the following characters, up
to the next white space, represent a variable name. This can be tricky when
working with cmdlets that manage variables. Supposing that $one contains the
value two, then New-Variable -name $one -value 'Hello' will create a new
variable named two, with the value Hello, because the dollar sign tells the shell
that you want to use the contents of $one. In contrast, New-Variable -name one
-value 'Hello' would create a new variable $one.
 %(percent sign)—This is an alias for the ForEach-Object cmdlet. It’s also the
modulus operator, returning the remainder from a division operation.

 ?(question mark)—This is an alias for the Where-Object cmdlet.
 >(right angle bracket)—This is a sort of alias for the Out-File cmdlet. It’s not
technically a true alias, but it does provide for Cmd.exe-style file redirection:
dir > files.txt.
 + - * / % (math operators)—These function as standard arithmetic operators.
Note that + is also used for string concatenation.
 -(dash or hyphen)—This precedes both parameter names and many operators,
such as -computerName or -eq. It also separates the verb and noun components
of a cmdlet name, as in Get-Content, and serves as the subtraction arithmetic
operator.
 @(at sign)—This has four uses in the shell:
– It precedes a hashtable’s opening curly brace (see curly braces, above).
– When used before parentheses, it encloses a comma-separated list of values
that form an array: $array = @(1,2,3,4). Both the @ sign and the parentheses are optional, because the shell will normally treat any comma-separated
list as an array anyway.
– It denotes a here-string, which is a block of literal string text. A here-string
starts with @" and ends with "@, and the closing mark must be on the beginning of a new line. Run help about_quoting_rules for more information
and examples. Here-strings can also be defined using single quotes.
– It is PowerShell’s splat operator. If you construct a hashtable where the keys
match parameter names, and those values’ keys are the parameters’ values,
then you can splat the hashtable to a cmdlet. Don wrote an article for TechNet Magazine on splatting (http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/magazine/
gg675931.aspx).
 &(ampersand)—This is PowerShell’s invocation operator, instructing the shell
to treat something as a command and to run it. For example, $a = "Dir" places
the string "Dir" into the variable $a. Then & $a will run the Dir command.
 ;(semicolon)—This is used to separate two independent PowerShell commands that are included on a single line: Dir ; Get-Process will run Dir and
then Get-Process. The results are sent to a single pipeline, but the results of
Dir aren’t piped to Get-Process.
 #(pound sign or hash mark)—This is used as a comment character. Any characters following #, to the next carriage return, are ignored by the shell. The angle
brackets, < and >, are used as part of the tags that define a block comment: use
<# to start a block comment, and #> to end one. Everything within the block
comment will be ignored by the shell.
 =(equal sign)—This is the assignment operator, used to assign a value to a variable: $one = 1. It isn’t used for quality comparisons; use -eq instead. Note that
the equal sign can be used in conjunction with a math operator: $var +=5 will
add 5 to whatever is currently in $var.

 |(pipe)—The pipe is used to convey the output of one cmdlet to the input of
another. The second cmdlet (the one receiving the output) uses pipeline
parameter binding to determine which parameter or parameters will receive
the piped-in objects. Chapter 9 has a discussion of this process.
 \ or /(backslash or forward slash)—A forward slash is used as a division operator in mathematical expressions; either the forward slash or backslash can be
used as a path separator in file paths: C:\Windows is the same as C:/Windows.
The backslash is also used as an escape character in WMI filter criteria and in
regular expressions.
 .(period)—The period has three main uses:
– It’s used to indicate that you want to access a member, such as a property or
method, or an object: $_.Status will access the Status property of whatever
object is in the $_ placeholder
– It’s used to dot source a script, meaning that the script will be run within the
current scope, and anything defined by that script will remain defined after
the script completes: . c:\myscript.ps1
– Two dots (..) form the range operator, which is discussed later in this chapter. You will also see two dots used to refer to the parent folder in the filesystem, such as in the path ..\
 ,(comma)—Outside of quotation marks, the comma separates the items in a
list or array: "One",2,"Three",4. It can be used to pass multiple static values to
a parameter that can accept them: Get-Process -computername Server1,
Server2,Server3.
 :(colon)—The colon (technically, two colons) is used to access static members
of a class; this gets into .NET Framework programming concepts.
[datetime]::now is an example (although you could achieve that same task by
running Get-Date).
 !(exclamation point)—This is an alias for the -not Boolean operator.
We think the only piece of punctuation on a U.S. keyboard that PowerShell doesn’t
actively use for something is the caret (^), although those do get used in regular
expressions.
28.2 Help file
Punctuation within the help file takes on slightly different meanings:
 [ ]—Square brackets that surround any text indicate that the text is optional.
That might include an entire command ([-Name <string>]), or it might indicate that a parameter is positional and that the name is optional ([-Name]
<string>). It can also indicate both: that a parameter is optional, and if used,
can be used positionally ([[-Name] <string>]). It’s always legal to use the
parameter name, if you’re in any doubt.

 [ ]—Adjacent square brackets indicate that a parameter can accept multiple
values (<string[]> instead of <string>).
 < >—Angle brackets surround data types, indicating what kind of value or
object a parameter expects: <string>, <int>, <process>, and so forth.
Always take the time to read the full help (add -full to the help command), because
it provides maximum detail as well as, in most cases, usage examples.
28.3 Operators
PowerShell doesn’t use the traditional comparison operators found in most programming languages. Instead, it uses these:
 -eq—Equality (-ceq for case-sensitive string comparisons)
 -ne—Inequality (-cne for case-sensitive string comparisons)
 -ge—Greater than or equal to (-cge for case-sensitive string comparisons)
 -le—Less than or equal to (-cle for case-sensitive string comparisons)
 -gt—Greater than (-cgt for case-sensitive string comparisons)
 -lt—Less than (-clt for case-sensitive string comparisons)
 -contains—Returns True if the specified collection contains the object specified ($collection -contains $object); -notcontains is the reverse
 -in—Returns True if the specified object is in the specified collection ($object
-in $collection); -notin is the reverse
Logical operators are used to combine multiple comparisons:
 -not—Reverses True and False (the ! symbol is an alias for this operator)
 -and—Both subexpressions must be True for the entire expression to be True
 -or—Either subexpression can be True for the entire expression to be True
In addition, there are operators that perform specific functions:
 -join—Joins the elements of an array into a delimited string
 -split—Splits a delimited string into an array
 -replace—Replaces occurrences of one string with another
 -is—Returns True if an item is of the specified type ($one -is [int])
 -as—Casts the item as the specified type ($one -as [int])
 ..—Is a range operator; 1..10 returns ten objects, 1 through 10.
 -f—Is the format operator, replacing placeholders with values: "{0}, {1}" -f
"Hello","World"
28.4 Custom property and column syntax
In several chapters, we showed you how to define custom properties using
Select-Object, or custom columns and list entries using Format-Table and
Format-List respectively. Here’s that hashtable syntax.
 You do this for each custom property or column:

@{label='Column_or_Property_Name';expression={Value_expression}}
Both of the keys, Label and Expression, can be abbreviated as l and e respectively
(be sure to type a lowercase “L” and not the number 1; you could also use n for Name,
in place of the lowercase “L”).
@{n='Column_or_Property_Name';e={Value_expression}}
Within the expression, the $_ placeholder can be used to refer to the current object
(such as the current table row, or the object to which you’re adding a custom property):
@{n='ComputerName';e={$_.Name}}
Both Select-Object and the Format- cmdlets look for the n (or name or label or l) key
and the e key; the Format- cmdlets can also use width and align (those are for
Format-Table only) and formatstring. Read the help for Format-Table for examples.
28.5 Pipeline parameter input
In chapter 9 you learned that there are two types of parameter binding: ByValue and
ByPropertyName. ByValue occurs first, and ByPropertyName only occurs if ByValue
didn’t work.
 For ByValue, the shell looks at the type of the object that was piped in. You can discover that type name by piping the object to Gm yourself. The shell then looks to see if
any of the cmdlet’s parameters accept that type of input and are configured to accept
pipeline input ByValue. It’s not possible for a cmdlet to have two parameters binding
the same data type in this fashion. In other words, you shouldn’t see a cmdlet that has
two parameters, each of which accepts <string> input, both of which accept pipeline
input ByValue.
 If ByValue doesn’t work, the shell switches to ByPropertyName. Here, it simply
looks at the properties of the piped-in object and attempts to find parameters with the
exact same names that can accept pipeline input ByPropertyName. If the piped-in
object has properties Name, Status, and ID, the shell will look to see if the cmdlet has
parameters named Name, Status, and ID. Those parameters must also be tagged as
accepting pipeline input ByPropertyName, which you can see when reading the full
help (add -full to the help command).
 Let’s look at how PowerShell does this. For this example, we’ll refer to the first
cmdlet and second cmdlet, assuming you have a command that looks something like
Get-Service | Stop-Service or Get-Service | Stop-Process. PowerShell follows
this process:
1 What is the TypeName of the objects produced by the first cmdlet? You can pipe
the results of the cmdlet to Get-Member on your own to see this. For multipart
type names like System.Diagnostics.Process, just remember that last bit:
Process.
2 Do any parameters of the second cmdlet accept the kind of object produced by
the first cmdlet (read the full help for the second cmdlet to determine this:

help <cmdlet name> -full)? If so, do they also accept that input from the pipeline using the ByValue technique? This is shown in the help file’s detailed information for each parameter.
3 If the answer to step 2 is yes, then the entire object produced by the first cmdlet
will be attached to the parameter identified in step 2. You’re done—do not continue to step 4. But if the answer to step 2 is no, then continue to step 4.
4 Consider the objects produced by the first cmdlet. What properties do those
objects have? You can see this, again, by piping the first cmdlet’s output to
Get-Member.
5 Consider the parameters of the second cmdlet (you’ll need to read the full help
again). Are there any parameters that (a) have the same name as one of the properties from step 4, and (b) accept pipeline input using the ByPropertyName
technique?
6 If there are any parameters meeting the criteria in step 5, then the properties’
values will be attached to the same-named parameters, and the second cmdlet
will run. If there are no matches between property names and ByPropertyNameenabled parameters, the second cmdlet will run with no pipeline input.
Keep in mind that you can always manually enter parameters and values on any command. Doing so will prevent that parameter from accepting pipeline input in any way,
even if it would normally have done so.
28.6 When to use $_
This is probably one of the most confusing things about the shell: when is the $_
placeholder permitted?
 This placeholder only works when the shell is explicitly looking for it and is prepared to fill it in with something. Generally speaking, that only happens within a script
block that’s dealing with pipeline input, in which case the $_ placeholder will contain
one pipeline input object at a time. You’ll run across this in a few different places:
 In the filtering script block used by Where-Object:
Get-Service |3 Where-Object {$_.Status -eq 'Running' }
 In the script blocks passed to ForEach-Object, such as the main Process script
block typically used with the cmdlet:
Get-WmiObject -class Win32_Service -filter "name='mssqlserver'" |
 ForEach-Object -process { $_.ChangeStartMode('Automatic') }
 In the Process script block of a filtering function or an advanced function. Our
other book, Learn PowerShell Toolmaking in a Month of Lunches, discusses these.
 In the expression of a hashtable that’s being used to create a custom property
or table column. Refer to section 28.4 in this chapter for more details, or read
chapters 8, 9, and 10 for a more complete discussion.
In every one of those cases, $_ occurs only within the curly braces of a script block.
That’s a good rule to remember for figuring out when it’s okay to use $_.
