https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/introduction-to-powershell/
Introduction to PowerShell

https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/introduction-to-powershell/2-what-is-powershell
What is PowerShell?
6 minutes
PowerShell consists of two parts, a command-line shell and a scripting language. It started out as a framework to automate administrative tasks in Windows. PowerShell has grown into a cross-platform tool that's used for many kinds of tasks.

A command-line shell lacks a graphical interface, where you would use a mouse to interact with graphical elements. Instead, you type text commands into a computer console. Here are some of the benefits of using a console:

Interacting with a console is often faster than using a graphical interface.
-In a console, you can run batches of commands, so it's ideal for task automation for continuous-integration pipelines.
-You can use a console to interact with cloud resources and other resources.
-You can store commands and scripts in a text file and use a source-control system. This benefit is probably one of the biggest because your commands are repeatable and auditable. In many systems, especially government systems, everything must be traced and evaluated, or audited. Audits cover everything from database changes to changes done by a script.

Features
PowerShell shares some features with traditional shells:

Built-in help system: Most shells have some kind of help system in which you can learn more about a command. For example, you can learn what the command does and what parameters it supports. The help system in PowerShell not only provides information about commands but also integrates with online help articles.

Pipeline: In traditional shells, a pipeline is used to run many commands sequentially. The output of one command is the input for the next command. PowerShell implements this concept like traditional shells do, but it differs because it operates on objects over text. You'll learn more about this feature later in this module.

Aliases: Aliases are alternate names that can be used to run commands. PowerShell supports the use of common aliases such as cls (clear the screen) and ls (list the files). So new users can use their knowledge of other frameworks and don't necessarily have to remember the PowerShell name for familiar commands.

PowerShell differs from a traditional command-line shell in a few ways:

It operates on objects over text. In a command-line shell, you have to run scripts whose output and input might differ. So you end up spending time formatting the output and extracting the data you need. By contrast, in PowerShell you use objects as input and output. That means you spend less time formatting and extracting.

It has cmdlets. Commands in PowerShell are called cmdlets. Unlike many other shell environments, in PowerShell, cmdlets are built on a common runtime rather than separate executables. This characteristic provides a consistent experience in parameter parsing and pipeline behavior.

Cmdlets typically take object input and return objects. The core cmdlets in PowerShell are built in .NET Core and are open source. You can extend PowerShell by using additional cmdlets, scripts, and functions from the community and other sources. Or you can build your own cmdlets in .NET Core or PowerShell.

It has many types of commands. Commands in PowerShell can be native executables, cmdlets, functions, scripts, or aliases. Every command you run belongs to one of these types. The words command and cmdlet are often used interchangeably because a cmdlet is a type of command.

https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/introduction-to-powershell/3-exercise-powershell
Exercise - Run your first PowerShell commands
To make sure your system is set up to work in PowerShell, run a command to verify your installation.

1. Type $PSVersionTable and then press Enter.

The output is formatted as a table. It provides information about not only your version of PowerShell but also your platform and edition.

For more information about your version of PowerShell, you can run a modified version of $PSVersionTable.
2. Type $PSVersionTable.PSVersion and then press Enter.

This output gives you more details about your version of PowerShell.

Notice that running $PSVersionTable results in output that looks like a table but is actually an object. So you can use a dot (.) to access a specific property like PSVersion.


