https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/introduction-to-powershell/5-exercise-cmdlets 
Exercise - Use the core cmdlets to learn about the available commands
10 minutes
In this exercise, you'll run commands that will help you learn more about PowerShell. PowerShell isn't something you learn overnight. It's learned command by command. You can speed up your learning by effectively using the core cmdlets.

Locate a command
Locate commands by using the Get-Command cmdlet. The cmdlet helps you search all of the cmdlets installed on your system. Use flags to narrow down your search results to just the cmdlets that fit your scenario.

In this scenario, you're looking for a cmdlet that can help you work with files.

Run the command Get-Command with the flag -Noun. Specify File* to find anything related to files.
Get-Command -Noun File*

The response shows something similar to the following text.
CommandType     Name                                               Version    Source
-----------     ----                                               -------    ------
Cmdlet          Get-FileHash                                       7.0.0.0    Microsoft.PowerShell.Utility
Cmdlet          Out-File                                           7.0.0.0    Microsoft.PowerShell.Utility
Cmdlet          Unblock-File                                       7.0.0.0    Microsoft.PowerShell.Utility

The cmdlets Get-FileHash, Out-File, and Unblock-File all match your query. Now you have a manageable response. To further filter the response, add the -Verb parameter to your query.
Get-Command -Verb Get -Noun File*

Run Get-Command. Specify the flags -Verb and -Noun.
The result is similar to the following output.
CommandType     Name                                               Version    Source
-----------     ----                                               -------    ------
Function        Get-FileHash                                       3.1.0.0    Microsoft...
Function        Get-FileIntegrity                                  2.0.0.0    Storage
Function        Get-FileShare                                      2.0.0.0    Storage
Function        Get-FileShareAccessControlEntry                    2.0.0.0    Storage
Function        Get-FileStorageTier                                2.0.0.0    Storage
This time, only one record matches your search because you specified both the -Noun parameter and the -Verb parameter. (Actually more than one)

Because the domain you work in is file management, you specified File as the noun. If you know what you want to do within that domain, you can specify -Verb parameters. By using one or possibly two parameters, you can quickly find the cmdlet that you need.

Use Get-Help to discover commands
After you find a cmdlet you want to use, you can learn more about it. For example, you can learn about the different ways to call it, what parameters you can use, or some example use cases. Use the Get-Help cmdlet to learn about cmdlets:

1. Run the command Get-Help.
Get-Help -Name Get-FileHash

This command produces an output similar to the following text.
NAME
 Get-FileHash

 SYNTAX
     Get-FileHash [-Path] <string[]> [[-Algorithm] {SHA1 | SHA256 | SHA384 | SHA512 | MD5}] [<CommonParameters>]

     Get-FileHash [-LiteralPath] <string[]> [[-Algorithm] {SHA1 | SHA256 | SHA384 | SHA512 | MD5}] [<CommonParameters>]

     Get-FileHash [-InputStream] <Stream> [[-Algorithm] {SHA1 | SHA256 | SHA384 | SHA512 | MD5}] [<CommonParameters>]


 ALIASES
     None


 REMARKS
     Get-Help cannot find the Help files for this cmdlet on this computer. It is displaying only partial help.
         -- To download and install Help files for the module that includes this cmdlet, use Update-Help.
         -- To view the Help topic for this cmdlet online, type: "Get-Help Get-FileHash -Online" or
            go to https://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/?LinkId=517145.


Because this output is a difficult to read, you decide to use a less verbose alternative. That is, you use the help alias.
2. Type the help command.
help Get-FileHash

You now get a reduced version of the help output. It looks like the following text.

NAME
 Get-FileHash

 SYNTAX
     Get-FileHash [-Path] <string[]> [[-Algorithm] {SHA1 | SHA256 | SHA384 | SHA512 | MD5}] [<CommonParameters>]

     Get-FileHash [-LiteralPath] <string[]> [[-Algorithm] {SHA1 | SHA256 | SHA384 | SHA512 | MD5}] [<CommonParameters>]

     Get-FileHash [-InputStream] <Stream> [[-Algorithm] {SHA1 | SHA256 | SHA384 | SHA512 | MD5}] [<CommonParameters>]


 PARAMETERS
     -Algorithm <string>
     
You can move through the results vertically, row by row, by using the arrow keys. To view the results page by page, use the spacebar.

3. Run help Get-FileHash -Examples.
help Get-FileHash -Examples
The output looks like the following text.
NAME
 Get-FileHash

 SYNOPSIS
     Computes the hash value for a file by using a specified hash algorithm.


     --------- Example 1: Compute the hash value for a file ---------

     Get-FileHash /etc/apt/sources.list | Format-List

     Algorithm : SHA256
     Hash      : 3CBCFDDEC145E3382D592266BE193E5BE53443138EE6AB6CA09FF20DF609E268
     Path      : /etc/apt/sources.list
     
This output contains a list of examples that use the cmdlet. Locate the part of the response that contains the text Example 1. This portion of the text shows how you can use Get-FileHash with a file path, piping it to the cmdlet Format-List.

Tip
To quickly see an example, add the flag -Examples when you search for help.

