https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/introduction-to-powershell/8-knowledge-check
Knowledge check
4 minutes
Choose the best response for each question. Then select Check your answers.

1. Using the help system, what command, or function, offers the best experience for finding out more about a command?

{your command} --help

Get-Help {your command}

X help {your command}

2. Which statement is the best choice to filter left?

Get-Process | Select-Object Name | Where-Object Name -eq name-of-process

Get-Process | Where-Object Name -eq name-of-process | Select-Object name-of-process

X  Get-Process -Name name-of-process | Select-Object Name

3. Which statement will most efficiently find the returned type from a command?

{command} --type

X  {command} | Get-Member

{command} | Get-Type

{command} Get-Member


Summary
2 minutes
In this module, you started by learning what PowerShell is and what you can use it for. You explored its primary features and how it differs from traditional shells like Git Bash. You also looked at how to install PowerShell and briefly explored authoring it by using Visual Studio Code and an extension.

You then learned about compiled commands called cmdlets. You focused on three specific cmdlets, known as core cmdlets. Core cmdlets help you list available commands. You learned how to use them to take advantage of the built-in help system and inspect the results from any cmdlet. These commands help you efficiently build your knowledge about PowerShell.

Later you learned about how to connect cmdlets together to form powerful expressions called pipelines. In a pipeline, one cmdlet's output serves as the input for the next connected cmdlet.

Finally, you learned about important principles like filter left and format right. By using these principles, you can write expressions efficiently.

You should now have a good understanding of PowerShell, what it's used for, and how to use its commands efficiently.




